DAVID COPPERFIELD.
     1869

THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND
EXPERIENCE OF
DAVID COPPERFIELD THE YOUNGER

CHAPTER 1
I AM BORN

Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether
that station will be held by anybody else, these pages must show. 
To begin my life with the beginning of my life, I record that I was
born (as I have been informed and believe) on a Friday, at twelve
o'clock at night.  It was remarked that the clock began to strike,
and I began to cry, simultaneously.

In consideration of the day and hour of my birth, it was declared
by the nurse, and by some sage women in the neighbourhood who had
taken a lively interest in me several months before there was any
possibility of our becoming personally acquainted, first, that I
was destined to be unlucky in life; and secondly, that I was
privileged to see ghosts and spirits; both these gifts inevitably
attaching, as they believed, to all unlucky infants of either
gender, born towards the small hours on a Friday night.

I need say nothing here, on the first head, because nothing can
show better than my history whether that prediction was verified or
falsified by the result.  On the second branch of the question, I
will only remark, that unless I ran through that part of my
inheritance while I was still a baby, I have not come into it yet. 
But I do not at all complain of having been kept out of this
property; and if anybody else should be in the present enjoyment of
it, he is heartily welcome to keep it.

I was born with a caul, which was advertised for sale, in the
newspapers, at the low price of fifteen guineas.  Whether sea-going
people were short of money about that time, or were short of faith
and preferred cork jackets, I don't know; all I know is, that there
was but one solitary bidding, and that was from an attorney
connected with the bill-broking business, who offered two pounds in
cash, and the balance in sherry, but declined to be guaranteed from
drowning on any higher bargain.  Consequently the advertisement was
withdrawn at a dead loss - for as to sherry, my poor dear mother's
own sherry was in the market then - and ten years afterwards, the
caul was put up in a raffle down in our part of the country, to
fifty members at half-a-crown a head, the winner to spend five
shillings.  I was present myself, and I remember to have felt quite
uncomfortable and confused, at a part of myself being disposed of
in that way.  The caul was won, I recollect, by an old lady with a
hand-basket, who, very reluctantly, produced from it the stipulated
five shillings, all in halfpence, and twopence halfpenny short - as
it took an immense time and a great waste of arithmetic, to
endeavour without any effect to prove to her.  It is a fact which
will be long remembered as remarkable down there, that she was
never drowned, but died triumphantly in bed, at ninety-two.  I have
understood that it was, to the last, her proudest boast, that she
never had been on the water in her life, except upon a bridge; and
that over her tea (to which she was extremely partial) she, to the
last, expressed her indignation at the impiety of mariners and
others, who had the presumption to go 'meandering' about the world. 
It was in vain to represent to her that some conveniences, tea
perhaps included, resulted from this objectionable practice.  She
always returned, with greater emphasis and with an instinctive
knowledge of the strength of her objection, 'Let us have no
meandering.'

Not to meander myself, at present, I will go back to my birth.

I was born at Blunderstone, in Suffolk, or 'there by', as they say
in Scotland.  I was a posthumous child.  My father's eyes had
closed upon the light of this world six months, when mine opened on
it.  There is something strange to me, even now, in the reflection
that he never saw me; and something stranger yet in the shadowy
remembrance that I have of my first childish associations with his
white grave-stone in the churchyard, and of the indefinable
compassion I used to feel for it lying out alone there in the dark
night, when our little parlour was warm and bright with fire and
candle, and the doors of our house were - almost cruelly, it seemed
to me sometimes - bolted and locked against it.

An aunt of my father's, and consequently a great-aunt of mine, of
whom I shall have more to relate by and by, was the principal
magnate of our family.  Miss Trotwood, or Miss Betsey, as my poor
mother always called her, when she sufficiently overcame her dread
of this formidable personage to mention her at all (which was
seldom), had been married to a husband younger than herself, who
was very handsome, except in the sense of the homely adage,
'handsome is, that handsome does' - for he was strongly suspected
of having beaten Miss Betsey, and even of having once, on a
disputed question of supplies, made some hasty but determined
arrangements to throw her out of a two pair of stairs' window. 
These evidences of an incompatibility of temper induced Miss Betsey
to pay him off, and effect a separation by mutual consent.  He went
to India with his capital, and there, according to a wild legend in
our family, he was once seen riding on an elephant, in company with
a Baboon; but I think it must have been a Baboo - or a Begum. 
Anyhow, from India tidings of his death reached home, within ten
years.  How they affected my aunt, nobody knew; for immediately
upon the separation, she took her maiden name again, bought a
cottage in a hamlet on the sea-coast a long way off, established
herself there as a single woman with one servant, and was
understood to live secluded, ever afterwards, in an inflexible
retirement.

My father had once been a favourite of hers, I believe; but she was
mortally affronted by his marriage, on the ground that my mother
was 'a wax doll'.  She had never seen my mother, but she knew her
to be not yet twenty.  My father and Miss Betsey never met again. 
He was double my mother's age when he married, and of but a
delicate constitution.  He died a year afterwards, and, as I have
said, six months before I came into the world.

This was the state of matters, on the afternoon of, what I may be
excused for calling, that eventful and important Friday.  I can
make no claim therefore to have known, at that time, how matters
stood; or to have any remembrance, founded on the evidence of my
own senses, of what follows.

My mother was sitting by the fire, but poorly in health, and very
low in spirits, looking at it through her tears, and desponding
heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger, who was
already welcomed by some grosses of prophetic pins, in a drawer
upstairs, to a world not at all excited on the subject of his
arrival; my mother, I say, was sitting by the fire, that bright,
windy March afternoon, very timid and sad, and very doubtful of
ever coming alive out of the trial that was before her, when,
lifting her eyes as she dried them, to the window opposite, she saw
a strange lady coming up the garden.

MY mother had a sure foreboding at the second glance, that it was
Miss Betsey.  The setting sun was glowing on the strange lady, over
the garden-fence, and she came walking up to the door with a fell
rigidity of figure and composure of countenance that could have
belonged to nobody else.

When she reached the house, she gave another proof of her identity. 
My father had often hinted that she seldom conducted herself like
any ordinary Christian; and now, instead of ringing the bell, she
came and looked in at that identical window, pressing the end of
her nose against the glass to that extent, that my poor dear mother
used to say it became perfectly flat and white in a moment.

She gave my mother such a turn, that I have always been convinced
I am indebted to Miss Betsey for having been born on a Friday.

My mother had left her chair in her agitation, and gone behind it
in the corner.  Miss Betsey, looking round the room, slowly and
inquiringly, began on the other side, and carried her eyes on, like
a Saracen's Head in a Dutch clock, until they reached my mother. 
Then she made a frown and a gesture to my mother, like one who was
accustomed to be obeyed, to come and open the door.  My mother
went.

'Mrs. David Copperfield, I think,' said Miss Betsey; the emphasis
referring, perhaps, to my mother's mourning weeds, and her
condition.

'Yes,' said my mother, faintly.

'Miss Trotwood,' said the visitor.  'You have heard of her, I dare
say?'

My mother answered she had had that pleasure.  And she had a
disagreeable consciousness of not appearing to imply that it had
been an overpowering pleasure.

'Now you see her,' said Miss Betsey.  My mother bent her head, and
begged her to walk in.

They went into the parlour my mother had come from, the fire in the
best room on the other side of the passage not being lighted - not
having been lighted, indeed, since my father's funeral; and when
they were both seated, and Miss Betsey said nothing, my mother,
after vainly trying to restrain herself, began to cry.
'Oh tut, tut, tut!' said Miss Betsey, in a hurry.  'Don't do that!
Come, come!'

My mother couldn't help it notwithstanding, so she cried until she
had had her cry out.

'Take off your cap, child,' said Miss Betsey, 'and let me see you.'

MY mother was too much afraid of her to refuse compliance with this
odd request, if she had any disposition to do so.  Therefore she
did as she was told, and did it with such nervous hands that her
hair (which was luxuriant and beautiful) fell all about her face.

'Why, bless my heart!' exclaimed Miss Betsey.  'You are a very
Baby!'

My mother was, no doubt, unusually youthful in appearance even for
her years; she hung her head, as if it were her fault, poor thing,
and said, sobbing, that indeed she was afraid she was but a
childish widow, and would be but a childish mother if she lived. 
In a short pause which ensued, she had a fancy that she felt Miss
Betsey touch her hair, and that with no ungentle hand; but, looking
at her, in her timid hope, she found that lady sitting with the
skirt of her dress tucked up, her hands folded on one knee, and her
feet upon the fender, frowning at the fire.

'In the name of Heaven,' said Miss Betsey, suddenly, 'why Rookery?'

'Do you mean the house, ma'am?' asked my mother.

'Why Rookery?' said Miss Betsey.  'Cookery would have been more to
the purpose, if you had had any practical ideas of life, either of
you.'

'The name was Mr. Copperfield's choice,' returned my mother.  'When
he bought the house, he liked to think that there were rooks about
it.'

The evening wind made such a disturbance just now, among some tall
old elm-trees at the bottom of the garden, that neither my mother
nor Miss Betsey could forbear glancing that way.  As the elms bent
to one another, like giants who were whispering secrets, and after
a few seconds of such repose, fell into a violent flurry, tossing
their wild arms about, as if their late confidences were really too
wicked for their peace of mind, some weatherbeaten ragged old
rooks'-nests, burdening their higher branches, swung like wrecks
upon a stormy sea.

'Where are the birds?' asked Miss Betsey.

'The -? ' My mother had been thinking of something else.

'The rooks - what has become of them?' asked Miss Betsey.

'There have not been any since we have lived here,' said my mother. 
'We thought - Mr. Copperfield thought - it was quite a large
rookery; but the nests were very old ones, and the birds have
deserted them a long while.'

'David Copperfield all over!' cried Miss Betsey.  'David
Copperfield from head to foot!  Calls a house a rookery when
there's not a rook near it, and takes the birds on trust, because
he sees the nests!'

'Mr. Copperfield,' returned my mother, 'is dead, and if you dare to
speak unkindly of him to me -'

My poor dear mother, I suppose, had some momentary intention of
committing an assault and battery upon my aunt, who could easily
have settled her with one hand, even if my mother had been in far
better training for such an encounter than she was that evening. 
But it passed with the action of rising from her chair; and she sat
down again very meekly, and fainted.

When she came to herself, or when Miss Betsey had restored her,
whichever it was, she found the latter standing at the window.  The
twilight was by this time shading down into darkness; and dimly as
they saw each other, they could not have done that without the aid
of the fire.

'Well?' said Miss Betsey, coming back to her chair, as if she had
only been taking a casual look at the prospect; 'and when do you
expect -'

'I am all in a tremble,' faltered my mother.  'I don't know what's
the matter.  I shall die, I am sure!'

'No, no, no,' said Miss Betsey.  'Have some tea.'

'Oh dear me, dear me, do you think it will do me any good?' cried
my mother in a helpless manner.

'Of course it will,' said Miss Betsey.  'It's nothing but fancy. 
What do you call your girl?'

'I don't know that it will be a girl, yet, ma'am,' said my mother
innocently.

'Bless the Baby!' exclaimed Miss Betsey, unconsciously quoting the
second sentiment of the pincushion in the drawer upstairs, but
applying it to my mother instead of me, 'I don't mean that.  I mean
your servant-girl.'

'Peggotty,' said my mother.

'Peggotty!' repeated Miss Betsey, with some indignation.  'Do you
mean to say, child, that any human being has gone into a Christian
church, and got herself named Peggotty?'
'It's her surname,' said my mother, faintly.  'Mr. Copperfield
called her by it, because her Christian name was the same as mine.'

'Here!  Peggotty!' cried Miss Betsey, opening the parlour door. 
'Tea.  Your mistress is a little unwell.  Don't dawdle.'

Having issued this mandate with as much potentiality as if she had
been a recognized authority in the house ever since it had been a
house, and having looked out to confront the amazed Peggotty coming
along the passage with a candle at the sound of a strange voice,
Miss Betsey shut the door again, and sat down as before: with her
feet on the fender, the skirt of her dress tucked up, and her hands
folded on one knee.

'You were speaking about its being a girl,' said Miss Betsey.  'I
have no doubt it will be a girl.  I have a presentiment that it
must be a girl.  Now child, from the moment of the birth of this
girl -'

'Perhaps boy,' my mother took the liberty of putting in.

'I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl,' returned
Miss Betsey.  'Don't contradict.  From the moment of this girl's
birth, child, I intend to be her friend.  I intend to be her
godmother, and I beg you'll call her Betsey Trotwood Copperfield. 
There must be no mistakes in life with THIS Betsey Trotwood.  There
must be no trifling with HER affections, poor dear.  She must be
well brought up, and well guarded from reposing any foolish
confidences where they are not deserved.  I must make that MY
care.'

There was a twitch of Miss Betsey's head, after each of these
sentences, as if her own old wrongs were working within her, and
she repressed any plainer reference to them by strong constraint. 
So my mother suspected, at least, as she observed her by the low
glimmer of the fire: too much scared by Miss Betsey, too uneasy in
herself, and too subdued and bewildered altogether, to observe
anything very clearly, or to know what to say.

'And was David good to you, child?' asked Miss Betsey, when she had
been silent for a little while, and these motions of her head had
gradually ceased.  'Were you comfortable together?'

'We were very happy,' said my mother.  'Mr. Copperfield was only
too good to me.'

'What, he spoilt you, I suppose?' returned Miss Betsey.

'For being quite alone and dependent on myself in this rough world
again, yes, I fear he did indeed,' sobbed my mother.

'Well!  Don't cry!' said Miss Betsey.  'You were not equally
matched, child - if any two people can be equally matched - and so
I asked the question.  You were an orphan, weren't you?'
'Yes.'

'And a governess?'

'I was nursery-governess in a family where Mr. Copperfield came to
visit.  Mr. Copperfield was very kind to me, and took a great deal
of notice of me, and paid me a good deal of attention, and at last
proposed to me.  And I accepted him.  And so we were married,' said
my mother simply.

'Ha!  Poor Baby!' mused Miss Betsey, with her frown still bent upon
the fire.  'Do you know anything?'

'I beg your pardon, ma'am,' faltered my mother.

'About keeping house, for instance,' said Miss Betsey.

'Not much, I fear,' returned my mother.  'Not so much as I could
wish.  But Mr. Copperfield was teaching me -'

('Much he knew about it himself!') said Miss Betsey in a
parenthesis.

- 'And I hope I should have improved, being very anxious to learn,
and he very patient to teach me, if the great misfortune of his
death' - my mother broke down again here, and could get no farther.

'Well, well!' said Miss Betsey.

-'I kept my housekeeping-book regularly, and balanced it with Mr.
Copperfield every night,' cried my mother in another burst of
distress, and breaking down again.

'Well, well!' said Miss Betsey.  'Don't cry any more.'

- 'And I am sure we never had a word of difference respecting it,
except when Mr. Copperfield objected to my threes and fives being
too much like each other, or to my putting curly tails to my sevens
and nines,' resumed my mother in another burst, and breaking down
again.

'You'll make yourself ill,' said Miss Betsey, 'and you know that
will not be good either for you or for my god-daughter.  Come!  You
mustn't do it!'

This argument had some share in quieting my mother, though her
increasing indisposition had a larger one.  There was an interval
of silence, only broken by Miss Betsey's occasionally ejaculating
'Ha!' as she sat with her feet upon the fender.

'David had bought an annuity for himself with his money, I know,'
said she, by and by.  'What did he do for you?'

'Mr. Copperfield,' said my mother, answering with some difficulty,
'was so considerate and good as to secure the reversion of a part
of it to me.'

'How much?' asked Miss Betsey.

'A hundred and five pounds a year,' said my mother.

'He might have done worse,' said my aunt.

The word was appropriate to the moment.  My mother was so much
worse that Peggotty, coming in with the teaboard and candles, and
seeing at a glance how ill she was, - as Miss Betsey might have
done sooner if there had been light enough, - conveyed her upstairs
to her own room with all speed; and immediately dispatched Ham
Peggotty, her nephew, who had been for some days past secreted in
the house, unknown to my mother, as a special messenger in case of
emergency, to fetch the nurse and doctor.

Those allied powers were considerably astonished, when they arrived
within a few minutes of each other, to find an unknown lady of
portentous appearance, sitting before the fire, with her bonnet
tied over her left arm, stopping her ears with jewellers' cotton. 
Peggotty knowing nothing about her, and my mother saying nothing
about her, she was quite a mystery in the parlour; and the fact of
her having a magazine of jewellers' cotton in her pocket, and
sticking the article in her ears in that way, did not detract from
the solemnity of her presence.

The doctor having been upstairs and come down again, and having
satisfied himself, I suppose, that there was a probability of this
unknown lady and himself having to sit there, face to face, for
some hours, laid himself out to be polite and social.  He was the
meekest of his sex, the mildest of little men.  He sidled in and
out of a room, to take up the less space.  He walked as softly as
the Ghost in Hamlet, and more slowly.  He carried his head on one
side, partly in modest depreciation of himself, partly in modest
propitiation of everybody else.  It is nothing to say that he
hadn't a word to throw at a dog.  He couldn't have thrown a word at
a mad dog.  He might have offered him one gently, or half a one, or
a fragment of one; for he spoke as slowly as he walked; but he
wouldn't have been rude to him, and he couldn't have been quick
with him, for any earthly consideration.

Mr. Chillip, looking mildly at my aunt with his head on one side,
and making her a little bow, said, in allusion to the jewellers'
cotton, as he softly touched his left ear:

'Some local irritation, ma'am?'

'What!' replied my aunt, pulling the cotton out of one ear like a
cork.

Mr. Chillip was so alarmed by her abruptness - as he told my mother
afterwards - that it was a mercy he didn't lose his presence of
mind.  But he repeated sweetly:

'Some local irritation, ma'am?'

'Nonsense!' replied my aunt, and corked herself again, at one blow.

Mr. Chillip could do nothing after this, but sit and look at her
feebly, as she sat and looked at the fire, until he was called
upstairs again.  After some quarter of an hour's absence, he
returned.

'Well?' said my aunt, taking the cotton out of the ear nearest to
him.

'Well, ma'am,' returned Mr. Chillip, 'we are- we are progressing
slowly, ma'am.'

'Ba--a--ah!' said my aunt, with a perfect shake on the contemptuous
interjection.  And corked herself as before.

Really - really - as Mr. Chillip told my mother, he was almost
shocked; speaking in a professional point of view alone, he was
almost shocked.  But he sat and looked at her, notwithstanding, for
nearly two hours, as she sat looking at the fire, until he was
again called out.  After another absence, he again returned.

'Well?' said my aunt, taking out the cotton on that side again.

'Well, ma'am,' returned Mr. Chillip, 'we are - we are progressing

slowly, ma'am.'

'Ya--a--ah!' said my aunt.  With such a snarl at him, that Mr.
Chillip absolutely could not bear it.  It was really calculated to
break his spirit, he said afterwards.  He preferred to go and sit
upon the stairs, in the dark and a strong draught, until he was
again sent for.

Ham Peggotty, who went to the national school, and was a very
dragon at his catechism, and who may therefore be regarded as a
credible witness, reported next day, that happening to peep in at
the parlour-door an hour after this, he was instantly descried by
Miss Betsey, then walking to and fro in a state of agitation, and
pounced upon before he could make his escape.  That there were now
occasional sounds of feet and voices overhead which he inferred the
cotton did not exclude, from the circumstance of his evidently
being clutched by the lady as a victim on whom to expend her
superabundant agitation when the sounds were loudest.  That,
marching him constantly up and down by the collar (as if he had
been taking too much laudanum), she, at those times, shook him,
rumpled his hair, made light of his linen, stopped his ears as if
she confounded them with her own, and otherwise tousled and
maltreated him.  This was in part confirmed by his aunt, who saw
him at half past twelve o'clock, soon after his release, and
affirmed that he was then as red as I was.

The mild Mr. Chillip could not possibly bear malice at such a time,
if at any time.  He sidled into the parlour as soon as he was at
liberty, and said to my aunt in his meekest manner:

'Well, ma'am, I am happy to congratulate you.'

'What upon?' said my aunt, sharply.

Mr. Chillip was fluttered again, by the extreme severity of my
aunt's manner; so he made her a little bow and gave her a little
smile, to mollify her.

'Mercy on the man, what's he doing!' cried my aunt, impatiently.
'Can't he speak?'

'Be calm, my dear ma'am,' said Mr. Chillip, in his softest accents.

'There is no longer any occasion for uneasiness, ma'am.  Be calm.'

It has since been considered almost a miracle that my aunt didn't
shake him, and shake what he had to say, out of him.  She only
shook her own head at him, but in a way that made him quail.

'Well, ma'am,' resumed Mr. Chillip, as soon as he had courage, 'I
am happy to congratulate you.  All is now over, ma'am, and well
over.'

During the five minutes or so that Mr. Chillip devoted to the
delivery of this oration, my aunt eyed him narrowly.

'How is she?' said my aunt, folding her arms with her bonnet still
tied on one of them.

'Well, ma'am, she will soon be quite comfortable, I hope,' returned
Mr. Chillip.  'Quite as comfortable as we can expect a young mother
to be, under these melancholy domestic circumstances.  There cannot
be any objection to your seeing her presently, ma'am.  It may do
her good.'

'And SHE.  How is SHE?' said my aunt, sharply.

Mr. Chillip laid his head a little more on one side, and looked at
my aunt like an amiable bird.

'The baby,' said my aunt.  'How is she?'

'Ma'am,' returned Mr. Chillip, 'I apprehended you had known.  It's
a boy.'

My aunt said never a word, but took her bonnet by the strings, in
the manner of a sling, aimed a blow at Mr. Chillip's head with it,
put it on bent, walked out, and never came back.  She vanished like
a discontented fairy; or like one of those supernatural beings,
whom it was popularly supposed I was entitled to see; and never
came back any more.

No.  I lay in my basket, and my mother lay in her bed; but Betsey
Trotwood Copperfield was for ever in the land of dreams and
shadows, the tremendous region whence I had so lately travelled;
and the light upon the window of our room shone out upon the
earthly bourne of all such travellers, and the mound above the
ashes and the dust that once was he, without whom I had never been.

CHAPTER 2
I OBSERVE

The first objects that assume a distinct presence before me, as I
look far back, into the blank of my infancy, are my mother with her
pretty hair and youthful shape, and Peggotty with no shape at all,
and eyes so dark that they seemed to darken their whole
neighbourhood in her face, and cheeks and arms so hard and red that
I wondered the birds didn't peck her in preference to apples.

I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart,
dwarfed to my sight by stooping down or kneeling on the floor, and
I going unsteadily from the one to the other.  I have an impression
on my mind which I cannot distinguish from actual remembrance, of
the touch of Peggotty's forefinger as she used to hold it out to
me, and of its being roughened by needlework, like a pocket
nutmeg-grater.

This may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of us can go
farther back into such times than many of us suppose; just as I
believe the power of observation in numbers of very young children
to be quite wonderful for its closeness and accuracy.  Indeed, I
think that most grown men who are remarkable in this respect, may
with greater propriety be said not to have lost the faculty, than
to have acquired it; the rather, as I generally observe such men to
retain a certain freshness, and gentleness, and capacity of being
pleased, which are also an inheritance they have preserved from
their childhood.

I might have a misgiving that I am 'meandering' in stopping to say
this, but that it brings me to remark that I build these
conclusions, in part upon my own experience of myself; and if it
should appear from anything I may set down in this narrative that
I was a child of close observation, or that as a man I have a
strong memory of my childhood, I undoubtedly lay claim to both of
these characteristics.

Looking back, as I was saying, into the blank of my infancy, the
first objects I can remember as standing out by themselves from a
confusion of things, are my mother and Peggotty.  What else do I
remember?  Let me see.

There comes out of the cloud, our house - not new to me, but quite
familiar, in its earliest remembrance.  On the ground-floor is
Peggotty's kitchen, opening into a back yard; with a pigeon-house
on a pole, in the centre, without any pigeons in it; a great dog-
kennel in a corner, without any dog; and a quantity of fowls that
look terribly tall to me, walking about, in a menacing and
ferocious manner.  There is one cock who gets upon a post to crow,
and seems to take particular notice of me as I look at him through
the kitchen window, who makes me shiver, he is so fierce.  Of the
geese outside the side-gate who come waddling after me with their
long necks stretched out when I go that way, I dream at night: as
a man environed by wild beasts might dream of lions.

Here is a long passage - what an enormous perspective I make of it! 
- leading from Peggotty's kitchen to the front door.  A dark
store-room opens out of it, and that is a place to be run past at
night; for I don't know what may be among those tubs and jars and
old tea-chests, when there is nobody in there with a dimly-burning
light, letting a mouldy air come out of the door, in which there is
the smell of soap, pickles, pepper, candles, and coffee, all at one
whiff.  Then there are the two parlours: the parlour in which we
sit of an evening, my mother and I and Peggotty - for Peggotty is
quite our companion, when her work is done and we are alone - and
the best parlour where we sit on a Sunday; grandly, but not so
comfortably.  There is something of a doleful air about that room
to me, for Peggotty has told me - I don't know when, but apparently
ages ago - about my father's funeral, and the company having their
black cloaks put on.  One Sunday night my mother reads to Peggotty
and me in there, how Lazarus was raised up from the dead.  And I am
so frightened that they are afterwards obliged to take me out of
bed, and show me the quiet churchyard out of the bedroom window,
with the dead all lying in their graves at rest, below the solemn
moon.

There is nothing half so green that I know anywhere, as the grass
of that churchyard; nothing half so shady as its trees; nothing
half so quiet as its tombstones.  The sheep are feeding there, when
I kneel up, early in the morning, in my little bed in a closet
within my mother's room, to look out at it; and I see the red light
shining on the sun-dial, and think within myself, 'Is the sun-dial
glad, I wonder, that it can tell the time again?'

Here is our pew in the church.  What a high-backed pew!  With a
window near it, out of which our house can be seen, and IS seen
many times during the morning's service, by Peggotty, who likes to
make herself as sure as she can that it's not being robbed, or is
not in flames.  But though Peggotty's eye wanders, she is much
offended if mine does, and frowns to me, as I stand upon the seat,
that I am to look at the clergyman.  But I can't always look at him
- I know him without that white thing on, and I am afraid of his
wondering why I stare so, and perhaps stopping the service to
inquire - and what am I to do?  It's a dreadful thing to gape, but
I must do something.  I look at my mother, but she pretends not to
see me.  I look at a boy in the aisle, and he makes faces at me. 
I look at the sunlight coming in at the open door through the
porch, and there I see a stray sheep - I don't mean a sinner, but
mutton - half making up his mind to come into the church.  I feel
that if I looked at him any longer, I might be tempted to say
something out loud; and what would become of me then!  I look up at
the monumental tablets on the wall, and try to think of Mr. Bodgers
late of this parish, and what the feelings of Mrs. Bodgers must
have been, when affliction sore, long time Mr. Bodgers bore, and
physicians were in vain.  I wonder whether they called in Mr.
Chillip, and he was in vain; and if so, how he likes to be reminded
of it once a week.  I look from Mr. Chillip, in his Sunday
neckcloth, to the pulpit; and think what a good place it would be
to play in, and what a castle it would make, with another boy
coming up the stairs to attack it, and having the velvet cushion
with the tassels thrown down on his head.  In time my eyes
gradually shut up; and, from seeming to hear the clergyman singing
a drowsy song in the heat, I hear nothing, until I fall off the
seat with a crash, and am taken out, more dead than alive, by
Peggotty.

And now I see the outside of our house, with the latticed
bedroom-windows standing open to let in the sweet-smelling air, and
the ragged old rooks'-nests still dangling in the elm-trees at the
bottom of the front garden.  Now I am in the garden at the back,
beyond the yard where the empty pigeon-house and dog-kennel are -
a very preserve of butterflies, as I remember it, with a high
fence, and a gate and padlock; where the fruit clusters on the
trees, riper and richer than fruit has ever been since, in any
other garden, and where my mother gathers some in a basket, while
I stand by, bolting furtive gooseberries, and trying to look
unmoved.  A great wind rises, and the summer is gone in a moment. 
We are playing in the winter twilight, dancing about the parlour. 
When my mother is out of breath and rests herself in an
elbow-chair, I watch her winding her bright curls round her
fingers, and straitening her waist, and nobody knows better than I
do that she likes to look so well, and is proud of being so pretty.

That is among my very earliest impressions.  That, and a sense that
we were both a little afraid of Peggotty, and submitted ourselves
in most things to her direction, were among the first opinions - if
they may be so called - that I ever derived from what I saw.

Peggotty and I were sitting one night by the parlour fire, alone. 
I had been reading to Peggotty about crocodiles.  I must have read
very perspicuously, or the poor soul must have been deeply
interested, for I remember she had a cloudy impression, after I had
done, that they were a sort of vegetable.  I was tired of reading,
and dead sleepy; but having leave, as a high treat, to sit up until
my mother came home from spending the evening at a neighbour's, I
would rather have died upon my post (of course) than have gone to
bed.  I had reached that stage of sleepiness when Peggotty seemed
to swell and grow immensely large.  I propped my eyelids open with
my two forefingers, and looked perseveringly at her as she sat at
work; at the little bit of wax-candle she kept for her thread - how
old it looked, being so wrinkled in all directions! - at the little
house with a thatched roof, where the yard-measure lived; at her
work-box with a sliding lid, with a view of St. Paul's Cathedral
(with a pink dome) painted on the top; at the brass thimble on her
finger; at herself, whom I thought lovely.  I felt so sleepy, that
I knew if I lost sight of anything for a moment, I was gone.

'Peggotty,' says I, suddenly, 'were you ever married?'

'Lord, Master Davy,' replied Peggotty.  'What's put marriage in
your head?'

She answered with such a start, that it quite awoke me.  And then
she stopped in her work, and looked at me, with her needle drawn
out to its thread's length.

'But WERE you ever married, Peggotty?' says I.  'You are a very
handsome woman, an't you?'

I thought her in a different style from my mother, certainly; but
of another school of beauty, I considered her a perfect example. 
There was a red velvet footstool in the best parlour, on which my
mother had painted a nosegay.  The ground-work of that stool, and
Peggotty's complexion appeared to me to be one and the same thing. 
The stool was smooth, and Peggotty was rough, but that made no
difference.

'Me handsome, Davy!' said Peggotty.  'Lawk, no, my dear!  But what
put marriage in your head?'

'I don't know! - You mustn't marry more than one person at a time,
may you, Peggotty?'

'Certainly not,' says Peggotty, with the promptest decision.

'But if you marry a person, and the person dies, why then you may
marry another person, mayn't you, Peggotty?'

'YOU MAY,' says Peggotty, 'if you choose, my dear.  That's a matter
of opinion.'

'But what is your opinion, Peggotty?' said I.

I asked her, and looked curiously at her, because she looked so
curiously at me.

'My opinion is,' said Peggotty, taking her eyes from me, after a
little indecision and going on with her work, 'that I never was
married myself, Master Davy, and that I don't expect to be.  That's
all I know about the subject.'

'You an't cross, I suppose, Peggotty, are you?' said I, after
sitting quiet for a minute.

I really thought she was, she had been so short with me; but I was
quite mistaken: for she laid aside her work (which was a stocking
of her own), and opening her arms wide, took my curly head within
them, and gave it a good squeeze.  I know it was a good squeeze,
because, being very plump, whenever she made any little exertion
after she was dressed, some of the buttons on the back of her gown
flew off.  And I recollect two bursting to the opposite side of the
parlour, while she was hugging me.

'Now let me hear some more about the Crorkindills,' said Peggotty,
who was not quite right in the name yet, 'for I an't heard half
enough.'

I couldn't quite understand why Peggotty looked so queer, or why
she was so ready to go back to the crocodiles.  However, we
returned to those monsters, with fresh wakefulness on my part, and
we left their eggs in the sand for the sun to hatch; and we ran
away from them, and baffled them by constantly turning, which they
were unable to do quickly, on account of their unwieldy make; and
we went into the water after them, as natives, and put sharp pieces
of timber down their throats; and in short we ran the whole
crocodile gauntlet.  I did, at least; but I had my doubts of
Peggotty, who was thoughtfully sticking her needle into various
parts of her face and arms, all the time.

We had exhausted the crocodiles, and begun with the alligators,
when the garden-bell rang.  We went out to the door; and there was
my mother, looking unusually pretty, I thought, and with her a
gentleman with beautiful black hair and whiskers, who had walked
home with us from church last Sunday.

As my mother stooped down on the threshold to take me in her arms
and kiss me, the gentleman said I was a more highly privileged
little fellow than a monarch - or something like that; for my later
understanding comes, I am sensible, to my aid here.

'What does that mean?' I asked him, over her shoulder.

He patted me on the head; but somehow, I didn't like him or his
deep voice, and I was jealous that his hand should touch my
mother's in touching me - which it did.  I put it away, as well as
I could.

'Oh, Davy!' remonstrated my mother.

'Dear boy!' said the gentleman.  'I cannot wonder at his devotion!'

I never saw such a beautiful colour on my mother's face before. 
She gently chid me for being rude; and, keeping me close to her
shawl, turned to thank the gentleman for taking so much trouble as
to bring her home.  She put out her hand to him as she spoke, and,
as he met it with his own, she glanced, I thought, at me.

'Let us say "good night", my fine boy,' said the gentleman, when he
had bent his head - I saw him! - over my mother's little glove.

'Good night!' said I.

'Come!  Let us be the best friends in the world!' said the
gentleman, laughing.  'Shake hands!'

My right hand was in my mother's left, so I gave him the other.

'Why, that's the Wrong hand, Davy!' laughed the gentleman.

MY mother drew my right hand forward, but I was resolved, for my
former reason, not to give it him, and I did not.  I gave him the
other, and he shook it heartily, and said I was a brave fellow, and
went away.

At this minute I see him turn round in the garden, and give us a
last look with his ill-omened black eyes, before the door was shut.

Peggotty, who had not said a word or moved a finger, secured the
fastenings instantly, and we all went into the parlour.  My mother,
contrary to her usual habit, instead of coming to the elbow-chair
by the fire, remained at the other end of the room, and sat singing
to herself.

- 'Hope you have had a pleasant evening, ma'am,' said Peggotty,
standing as stiff as a barrel in the centre of the room, with a
candlestick in her hand.

'Much obliged to you, Peggotty,' returned my mother, in a cheerful
voice, 'I have had a VERY pleasant evening.'

'A stranger or so makes an agreeable change,' suggested Peggotty.

'A very agreeable change, indeed,' returned my mother.

Peggotty continuing to stand motionless in the middle of the room,
and my mother resuming her singing, I fell asleep, though I was not
so sound asleep but that I could hear voices, without hearing what
they said.  When I half awoke from this uncomfortable doze, I found
Peggotty and my mother both in tears, and both talking.

'Not such a one as this, Mr. Copperfield wouldn't have liked,' said
Peggotty.  'That I say, and that I swear!'

'Good Heavens!' cried my mother, 'you'll drive me mad!  Was ever
any poor girl so ill-used by her servants as I am!  Why do I do
myself the injustice of calling myself a girl?  Have I never been
married, Peggotty?'

'God knows you have, ma'am,' returned Peggotty.
'Then, how can you dare,' said my mother - 'you know I don't mean
how can you dare, Peggotty, but how can you have the heart - to
make me so uncomfortable and say such bitter things to me, when you
are well aware that I haven't, out of this place, a single friend
to turn to?'

'The more's the reason,' returned Peggotty, 'for saying that it
won't do.  No!  That it won't do.  No!  No price could make it do. 
No!' - I thought Peggotty would have thrown the candlestick away,
she was so emphatic with it.

'How can you be so aggravating,' said my mother, shedding more
tears than before, 'as to talk in such an unjust manner!  How can
you go on as if it was all settled and arranged, Peggotty, when I
tell you over and over again, you cruel thing, that beyond the
commonest civilities nothing has passed!  You talk of admiration. 
What am I to do?  If people are so silly as to indulge the
sentiment, is it my fault?  What am I to do, I ask you?  Would you
wish me to shave my head and black my face, or disfigure myself
with a burn, or a scald, or something of that sort?  I dare say you
would, Peggotty.  I dare say you'd quite enjoy it.'

Peggotty seemed to take this aspersion very much to heart, I
thought.

'And my dear boy,' cried my mother, coming to the elbow-chair in
which I was, and caressing me, 'my own little Davy!  Is it to be
hinted to me that I am wanting in affection for my precious
treasure, the dearest little fellow that ever was!'

'Nobody never went and hinted no such a thing,' said Peggotty.

'You did, Peggotty!' returned my mother.  'You know you did.  What
else was it possible to infer from what you said, you unkind
creature, when you know as well as I do, that on his account only
last quarter I wouldn't buy myself a new parasol, though that old
green one is frayed the whole way up, and the fringe is perfectly
mangy?  You know it is, Peggotty.  You can't deny it.'  Then,
turning affectionately to me, with her cheek against mine, 'Am I a
naughty mama to you, Davy?  Am I a nasty, cruel, selfish, bad mama? 
Say I am, my child; say "yes", dear boy, and Peggotty will love
you; and Peggotty's love is a great deal better than mine, Davy. 
I don't love you at all, do I?'

At this, we all fell a-crying together.  I think I was the loudest
of the party, but I am sure we were all sincere about it.  I was
quite heart-broken myself, and am afraid that in the first
transports of wounded tenderness I called Peggotty a 'Beast'.  That
honest creature was in deep affliction, I remember, and must have
become quite buttonless on the occasion; for a little volley of
those explosives went off, when, after having made it up with my
mother, she kneeled down by the elbow-chair, and made it up with
me.

We went to bed greatly dejected.  My sobs kept waking me, for a
long time; and when one very strong sob quite hoisted me up in bed,
I found my mother sitting on the coverlet, and leaning over me.  I
fell asleep in her arms, after that, and slept soundly.

Whether it was the following Sunday when I saw the gentleman again,
or whether there was any greater lapse of time before he
reappeared, I cannot recall.  I don't profess to be clear about
dates.  But there he was, in church, and he walked home with us
afterwards.  He came in, too, to look at a famous geranium we had,
in the parlour-window.  It did not appear to me that he took much
notice of it, but before he went he asked my mother to give him a
bit of the blossom.  She begged him to choose it for himself, but
he refused to do that - I could not understand why - so she plucked
it for him, and gave it into his hand.  He said he would never,
never part with it any more; and I thought he must be quite a fool
not to know that it would fall to pieces in a day or two.

Peggotty began to be less with us, of an evening, than she had
always been.  My mother deferred to her very much - more than
usual, it occurred to me - and we were all three excellent friends;
still we were different from what we used to be, and were not so
comfortable among ourselves.  Sometimes I fancied that Peggotty
perhaps objected to my mother's wearing all the pretty dresses she
had in her drawers, or to her going so often to visit at that
neighbour's; but I couldn't, to my satisfaction, make out how it
was.

Gradually, I became used to seeing the gentleman with the black
whiskers.  I liked him no better than at first, and had the same
uneasy jealousy of him; but if I had any reason for it beyond a
child's instinctive dislike, and a general idea that Peggotty and
I could make much of my mother without any help, it certainly was
not THE reason that I might have found if I had been older.  No
such thing came into my mind, or near it.  I could observe, in
little pieces, as it were; but as to making a net of a number of
these pieces, and catching anybody in it, that was, as yet, beyond
me.

One autumn morning I was with my mother in the front garden, when
Mr. Murdstone - I knew him by that name now - came by, on
horseback.  He reined up his horse to salute my mother, and said he
was going to Lowestoft to see some friends who were there with a
yacht, and merrily proposed to take me on the saddle before him if
I would like the ride.

The air was so clear and pleasant, and the horse seemed to like the
idea of the ride so much himself, as he stood snorting and pawing
at the garden-gate, that I had a great desire to go.  So I was sent
upstairs to Peggotty to be made spruce; and in the meantime Mr.
Murdstone dismounted, and, with his horse's bridle drawn over his
arm, walked slowly up and down on the outer side of the sweetbriar
fence, while my mother walked slowly up and down on the inner to
keep him company.  I recollect Peggotty and I peeping out at them
from my little window; I recollect how closely they seemed to be
examining the sweetbriar between them, as they strolled along; and
how, from being in a perfectly angelic temper, Peggotty turned
cross in a moment, and brushed my hair the wrong way, excessively
hard.

Mr. Murdstone and I were soon off, and trotting along on the green
turf by the side of the road.  He held me quite easily with one
arm, and I don't think I was restless usually; but I could not make
up my mind to sit in front of him without turning my head
sometimes, and looking up in his face.  He had that kind of shallow
black eye - I want a better word to express an eye that has no
depth in it to be looked into - which, when it is abstracted, seems
from some peculiarity of light to be disfigured, for a moment at a
time, by a cast.  Several times when I glanced at him, I observed
that appearance with a sort of awe, and wondered what he was
thinking about so closely.  His hair and whiskers were blacker and
thicker, looked at so near, than even I had given them credit for
being.  A squareness about the lower part of his face, and the
dotted indication of the strong black beard he shaved close every
day, reminded me of the wax-work that had travelled into our
neighbourhood some half-a-year before.  This, his regular eyebrows,
and the rich white, and black, and brown, of his complexion -
confound his complexion, and his memory! - made me think him, in
spite of my misgivings, a very handsome man.  I have no doubt that
my poor dear mother thought him so too.

We went to an hotel by the sea, where two gentlemen were smoking
cigars in a room by themselves.  Each of them was lying on at least
four chairs, and had a large rough jacket on.  In a corner was a
heap of coats and boat-cloaks, and a flag, all bundled up together.

They both rolled on to their feet in an untidy sort of manner, when
we came in, and said, 'Halloa, Murdstone!  We thought you were
dead!'

'Not yet,' said Mr. Murdstone.

'And who's this shaver?' said one of the gentlemen, taking hold of
me.

'That's Davy,' returned Mr. Murdstone.

'Davy who?' said the gentleman.  'Jones?'

'Copperfield,' said Mr. Murdstone.

'What!  Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield's encumbrance?' cried the
gentleman.  'The pretty little widow?'

'Quinion,' said Mr. Murdstone, 'take care, if you please. 
Somebody's sharp.'

'Who is?' asked the gentleman, laughing.
I looked up, quickly; being curious to know.

'Only Brooks of Sheffield,' said Mr. Murdstone.

I was quite relieved to find that it was only Brooks of Sheffield;
for, at first, I really thought it was I.

There seemed to be something very comical in the reputation of Mr.
Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentlemen laughed heartily when
he was mentioned, and Mr. Murdstone was a good deal amused also. 
After some laughing, the gentleman whom he had called Quinion,
said:

'And what is the opinion of Brooks of Sheffield, in reference to
the projected business?'

'Why, I don't know that Brooks understands much about it at
present,' replied Mr. Murdstone; 'but he is not generally
favourable, I believe.'

There was more laughter at this, and Mr. Quinion said he would ring
the bell for some sherry in which to drink to Brooks.  This he did;
and when the wine came, he made me have a little, with a biscuit,
and, before I drank it, stand up and say, 'Confusion to Brooks of
Sheffield!'  The toast was received with great applause, and such
hearty laughter that it made me laugh too; at which they laughed
the more.  In short, we quite enjoyed ourselves.

We walked about on the cliff after that, and sat on the grass, and
looked at things through a telescope - I could make out nothing
myself when it was put to my eye, but I pretended I could - and
then we came back to the hotel to an early dinner.  All the time we
were out, the two gentlemen smoked incessantly - which, I thought,
if I might judge from the smell of their rough coats, they must
have been doing, ever since the coats had first come home from the
tailor's.  I must not forget that we went on board the yacht, where
they all three descended into the cabin, and were busy with some
papers.  I saw them quite hard at work, when I looked down through
the open skylight.  They left me, during this time, with a very
nice man with a very large head of red hair and a very small shiny
hat upon it, who had got a cross-barred shirt or waistcoat on, with
'Skylark' in capital letters across the chest.  I thought it was
his name; and that as he lived on board ship and hadn't a street
door to put his name on, he put it there instead; but when I called
him Mr. Skylark, he said it meant the vessel.

I observed all day that Mr. Murdstone was graver and steadier than
the two gentlemen.  They were very gay and careless.  They joked
freely with one another, but seldom with him.  It appeared to me
that he was more clever and cold than they were, and that they
regarded him with something of my own feeling.  I remarked that,
once or twice when Mr. Quinion was talking, he looked at Mr.
Murdstone sideways, as if to make sure of his not being displeased;
and that once when Mr. Passnidge (the other gentleman) was in high
spirits, he trod upon his foot, and gave him a secret caution with
his eyes, to observe Mr. Murdstone, who was sitting stern and
silent.  Nor do I recollect that Mr. Murdstone laughed at all that
day, except at the Sheffield joke - and that, by the by, was his
own.

We went home early in the evening.  It was a very fine evening, and
my mother and he had another stroll by the sweetbriar, while I was
sent in to get my tea.  When he was gone, my mother asked me all
about the day I had had, and what they had said and done.  I
mentioned what they had said about her, and she laughed, and told
me they were impudent fellows who talked nonsense - but I knew it
pleased her.  I knew it quite as well as I know it now.  I took the
opportunity of asking if she was at all acquainted with Mr. Brooks
of Sheffield, but she answered No, only she supposed he must be a
manufacturer in the knife and fork way.

Can I say of her face - altered as I have reason to remember it,
perished as I know it is - that it is gone, when here it comes
before me at this instant, as distinct as any face that I may
choose to look on in a crowded street?  Can I say of her innocent
and girlish beauty, that it faded, and was no more, when its breath
falls on my cheek now, as it fell that night?  Can I say she ever
changed, when my remembrance brings her back to life, thus only;
and, truer to its loving youth than I have been, or man ever is,
still holds fast what it cherished then?

I write of her just as she was when I had gone to bed after this
talk, and she came to bid me good night.  She kneeled down
playfully by the side of the bed, and laying her chin upon her
hands, and laughing, said:

'What was it they said, Davy?  Tell me again.  I can't believe it.'

'"Bewitching -"' I began.

My mother put her hands upon my lips to stop me.

'It was never bewitching,' she said, laughing.  'It never could
have been bewitching, Davy.  Now I know it wasn't!'

'Yes, it was.  "Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield",' I repeated stoutly. 
'And, "pretty."'

'No, no, it was never pretty.  Not pretty,' interposed my mother,
laying her fingers on my lips again.

'Yes it was.  "Pretty little widow."'

'What foolish, impudent creatures!' cried my mother, laughing and
covering her face.  'What ridiculous men!  An't they?  Davy dear -'

'Well, Ma.'

'Don't tell Peggotty; she might be angry with them.  I am
dreadfully angry with them myself; but I would rather Peggotty
didn't know.'

I promised, of course; and we kissed one another over and over
again, and I soon fell fast asleep.

It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if it were the next
day when Peggotty broached the striking and adventurous proposition
I am about to mention; but it was probably about two months
afterwards.

We were sitting as before, one evening (when my mother was out as
before), in company with the stocking and the yard-measure, and the
bit of wax, and the box with St. Paul's on the lid, and the
crocodile book, when Peggotty, after looking at me several times,
and opening her mouth as if she were going to speak, without doing
it - which I thought was merely gaping, or I should have been
rather alarmed - said coaxingly:

'Master Davy, how should you like to go along with me and spend a
fortnight at my brother's at Yarmouth?  Wouldn't that be a treat?'

'Is your brother an agreeable man, Peggotty?' I inquired,
provisionally.

'Oh, what an agreeable man he is!' cried Peggotty, holding up her
hands.  'Then there's the sea; and the boats and ships; and the
fishermen; and the beach; and Am to play with -'

Peggotty meant her nephew Ham, mentioned in my first chapter; but
she spoke of him as a morsel of English Grammar.

I was flushed by her summary of delights, and replied that it would
indeed be a treat, but what would my mother say?

'Why then I'll as good as bet a guinea,' said Peggotty, intent upon
my face, 'that she'll let us go.  I'll ask her, if you like, as
soon as ever she comes home.  There now!'

'But what's she to do while we're away?' said I, putting my small
elbows on the table to argue the point.  'She can't live by
herself.'

If Peggotty were looking for a hole, all of a sudden, in the heel
of that stocking, it must have been a very little one indeed, and
not worth darning.

'I say!  Peggotty!  She can't live by herself, you know.'

'Oh, bless you!' said Peggotty, looking at me again at last. 
'Don't you know?  She's going to stay for a fortnight with Mrs.
Grayper.  Mrs. Grayper's going to have a lot of company.'

Oh!  If that was it, I was quite ready to go.  I waited, in the
utmost impatience, until my mother came home from Mrs. Grayper's
(for it was that identical neighbour), to ascertain if we could get
leave to carry out this great idea.  Without being nearly so much
surprised as I had expected, my mother entered into it readily; and
it was all arranged that night, and my board and lodging during the
visit were to be paid for.

The day soon came for our going.  It was such an early day that it
came soon, even to me, who was in a fever of expectation, and half
afraid that an earthquake or a fiery mountain, or some other great
convulsion of nature, might interpose to stop the expedition.  We
were to go in a carrier's cart, which departed in the morning after
breakfast.  I would have given any money to have been allowed to
wrap myself up over-night, and sleep in my hat and boots.

It touches me nearly now, although I tell it lightly, to recollect
how eager I was to leave my happy home; to think how little I
suspected what I did leave for ever.

I am glad to recollect that when the carrier's cart was at the
gate, and my mother stood there kissing me, a grateful fondness for
her and for the old place I had never turned my back upon before,
made me cry.  I am glad to know that my mother cried too, and that
I felt her heart beat against mine.

I am glad to recollect that when the carrier began to move, my
mother ran out at the gate, and called to him to stop, that she
might kiss me once more.  I am glad to dwell upon the earnestness
and love with which she lifted up her face to mine, and did so.

As we left her standing in the road, Mr. Murdstone came up to where
she was, and seemed to expostulate with her for being so moved.  I
was looking back round the awning of the cart, and wondered what
business it was of his.  Peggotty, who was also looking back on the
other side, seemed anything but satisfied; as the face she brought
back in the cart denoted.

I sat looking at Peggotty for some time, in a reverie on this
supposititious case: whether, if she were employed to lose me like
the boy in the fairy tale, I should be able to track my way home
again by the buttons she would shed.

CHAPTER 3
I HAVE A CHANGE

The carrier's horse was the laziest horse in the world, I should
hope, and shuffled along, with his head down, as if he liked to
keep people waiting to whom the packages were directed.  I fancied,
indeed, that he sometimes chuckled audibly over this reflection,
but the carrier said he was only troubled with a cough.
The carrier had a way of keeping his head down, like his horse, and
of drooping sleepily forward as he drove, with one of his arms on
each of his knees.  I say 'drove', but it struck me that the cart
would have gone to Yarmouth quite as well without him, for the
horse did all that; and as to conversation, he had no idea of it
but whistling.

Peggotty had a basket of refreshments on her knee, which would have
lasted us out handsomely, if we had been going to London by the
same conveyance.  We ate a good deal, and slept a good deal. 
Peggotty always went to sleep with her chin upon the handle of the
basket, her hold of which never relaxed; and I could not have
believed unless I had heard her do it, that one defenceless woman
could have snored so much.

We made so many deviations up and down lanes, and were such a long
time delivering a bedstead at a public-house, and calling at other
places, that I was quite tired, and very glad, when we saw
Yarmouth.  It looked rather spongy and soppy, I thought, as I
carried my eye over the great dull waste that lay across the river;
and I could not help wondering, if the world were really as round
as my geography book said, how any part of it came to be so flat. 
But I reflected that Yarmouth might be situated at one of the
poles; which would account for it.

As we drew a little nearer, and saw the whole adjacent prospect
lying a straight low line under the sky, I hinted to Peggotty that
a mound or so might have improved it; and also that if the land had
been a little more separated from the sea, and the town and the
tide had not been quite so much mixed up, like toast and water, it
would have been nicer.  But Peggotty said, with greater emphasis
than usual, that we must take things as we found them, and that,
for her part, she was proud to call herself a Yarmouth Bloater.

When we got into the street (which was strange enough to me) and
smelt the fish, and pitch, and oakum, and tar, and saw the sailors
walking about, and the carts jingling up and down over the stones,
I felt that I had done so busy a place an injustice; and said as
much to Peggotty, who heard my expressions of delight with great
complacency, and told me it was well known (I suppose to those who
had the good fortune to be born Bloaters) that Yarmouth was, upon
the whole, the finest place in the universe.

'Here's my Am!' screamed Peggotty, 'growed out of knowledge!'

He was waiting for us, in fact, at the public-house; and asked me
how I found myself, like an old acquaintance.  I did not feel, at
first, that I knew him as well as he knew me, because he had never
come to our house since the night I was born, and naturally he had
the advantage of me.  But our intimacy was much advanced by his
taking me on his back to carry me home.  He was, now, a huge,
strong fellow of six feet high, broad in proportion, and
round-shouldered; but with a simpering boy's face and curly light
hair that gave him quite a sheepish look.  He was dressed in a
canvas jacket, and a pair of such very stiff trousers that they
would have stood quite as well alone, without any legs in them. 
And you couldn't so properly have said he wore a hat, as that he
was covered in a-top, like an old building, with something pitchy.

Ham carrying me on his back and a small box of ours under his arm,
and Peggotty carrying another small box of ours, we turned down
lanes bestrewn with bits of chips and little hillocks of sand, and
went past gas-works, rope-walks, boat-builders' yards, shipwrights'
yards, ship-breakers' yards, caulkers' yards, riggers' lofts,
smiths' forges, and a great litter of such places, until we came
out upon the dull waste I had already seen at a distance; when Ham
said,

'Yon's our house, Mas'r Davy!'

I looked in all directions, as far as I could stare over the
wilderness, and away at the sea, and away at the river, but no
house could I make out.  There was a black barge, or some other
kind of superannuated boat, not far off, high and dry on the
ground, with an iron funnel sticking out of it for a chimney and
smoking very cosily; but nothing else in the way of a habitation
that was visible to me.

'That's not it?' said I.  'That ship-looking thing?'

'That's it, Mas'r Davy,' returned Ham.

If it had been Aladdin's palace, roc's egg and all, I suppose I
could not have been more charmed with the romantic idea of living
in it.  There was a delightful door cut in the side, and it was
roofed in, and there were little windows in it; but the wonderful
charm of it was, that it was a real boat which had no doubt been
upon the water hundreds of times, and which had never been intended
to be lived in, on dry land.  That was the captivation of it to me. 
If it had ever been meant to be lived in, I might have thought it
small, or inconvenient, or lonely; but never having been designed
for any such use, it became a perfect abode.

It was beautifully clean inside, and as tidy as possible.  There
was a table, and a Dutch clock, and a chest of drawers, and on the
chest of drawers there was a tea-tray with a painting on it of a
lady with a parasol, taking a walk with a military-looking child
who was trundling a hoop.  The tray was kept from tumbling down, by
a bible; and the tray, if it had tumbled down, would have smashed
a quantity of cups and saucers and a teapot that were grouped
around the book.  On the walls there were some common coloured
pictures, framed and glazed, of scripture subjects; such as I have
never seen since in the hands of pedlars, without seeing the whole
interior of Peggotty's brother's house again, at one view.  Abraham
in red going to sacrifice Isaac in blue, and Daniel in yellow cast
into a den of green lions, were the most prominent of these.  Over
the little mantelshelf, was a picture of the 'Sarah Jane' lugger,
built at Sunderland, with a real little wooden stern stuck on to
it; a work of art, combining composition with carpentry, which I
considered to be one of the most enviable possessions that the
world could afford.  There were some hooks in the beams of the
ceiling, the use of which I did not divine then; and some lockers
and boxes and conveniences of that sort, which served for seats and
eked out the chairs.

All this I saw in the first glance after I crossed the threshold -
child-like, according to my theory - and then Peggotty opened a
little door and showed me my bedroom.  It was the completest and
most desirable bedroom ever seen - in the stern of the vessel; with
a little window, where the rudder used to go through; a little
looking-glass, just the right height for me, nailed against the
wall, and framed with oyster-shells; a little bed, which there was
just room enough to get into; and a nosegay of seaweed in a blue
mug on the table.  The walls were whitewashed as white as milk, and
the patchwork counterpane made my eyes quite ache with its
brightness.  One thing I particularly noticed in this delightful
house, was the smell of fish; which was so searching, that when I
took out my pocket-handkerchief to wipe my nose, I found it smelt
exactly as if it had wrapped up a lobster.  On my imparting this
discovery in confidence to Peggotty, she informed me that her
brother dealt in lobsters, crabs, and crawfish; and I afterwards
found that a heap of these creatures, in a state of wonderful
conglomeration with one another, and never leaving off pinching
whatever they laid hold of, were usually to be found in a little
wooden outhouse where the pots and kettles were kept.

We were welcomed by a very civil woman in a white apron, whom I had
seen curtseying at the door when I was on Ham's back, about a
quarter of a mile off.  Likewise by a most beautiful little girl
(or I thought her so) with a necklace of blue beads on, who
wouldn't let me kiss her when I offered to, but ran away and hid
herself.  By and by, when we had dined in a sumptuous manner off
boiled dabs, melted butter, and potatoes, with a chop for me, a
hairy man with a very good-natured face came home.  As he called
Peggotty 'Lass', and gave her a hearty smack on the cheek, I had no
doubt, from the general propriety of her conduct, that he was her
brother; and so he turned out - being presently introduced to me as
Mr. Peggotty, the master of the house.

'Glad to see you, sir,' said Mr. Peggotty.  'You'll find us rough,
sir, but you'll find us ready.'

I thanked him, and replied that I was sure I should be happy in
such a delightful place.

'How's your Ma, sir?' said Mr. Peggotty.  'Did you leave her pretty
jolly?'

I gave Mr. Peggotty to understand that she was as jolly as I could
wish, and that she desired her compliments - which was a polite
fiction on my part.

'I'm much obleeged to her, I'm sure,' said Mr. Peggotty.  'Well,
sir, if you can make out here, fur a fortnut, 'long wi' her,'
nodding at his sister, 'and Ham, and little Em'ly, we shall be
proud of your company.'

Having done the honours of his house in this hospitable manner, Mr.
Peggotty went out to wash himself in a kettleful of hot water,
remarking that 'cold would never get his muck off'.  He soon
returned, greatly improved in appearance; but so rubicund, that I
couldn't help thinking his face had this in common with the
lobsters, crabs, and crawfish, - that it went into the hot water
very black, and came out very red.

After tea, when the door was shut and all was made snug (the nights
being cold and misty now), it seemed to me the most delicious
retreat that the imagination of man could conceive.  To hear the
wind getting up out at sea, to know that the fog was creeping over
the desolate flat outside, and to look at the fire, and think that
there was no house near but this one, and this one a boat, was like
enchantment.  Little Em'ly had overcome her shyness, and was
sitting by my side upon the lowest and least of the lockers, which
was just large enough for us two, and just fitted into the chimney
corner.  Mrs. Peggotty with the white apron, was knitting on the
opposite side of the fire.  Peggotty at her needlework was as much
at home with St. Paul's and the bit of wax-candle, as if they had
never known any other roof.  Ham, who had been giving me my first
lesson in all-fours, was trying to recollect a scheme of telling
fortunes with the dirty cards, and was printing off fishy
impressions of his thumb on all the cards he turned.  Mr. Peggotty
was smoking his pipe.  I felt it was a time for conversation and
confidence.

'Mr. Peggotty!' says I.

'Sir,' says he.

'Did you give your son the name of Ham, because you lived in a sort
of ark?'

Mr. Peggotty seemed to think it a deep idea, but answered:

'No, sir.  I never giv him no name.'

'Who gave him that name, then?' said I, putting question number two
of the catechism to Mr. Peggotty.

'Why, sir, his father giv it him,' said Mr. Peggotty.

'I thought you were his father!'

'My brother Joe was his father,' said Mr. Peggotty.

'Dead, Mr. Peggotty?' I hinted, after a respectful pause.

'Drowndead,' said Mr. Peggotty.

I was very much surprised that Mr. Peggotty was not Ham's father,
and began to wonder whether I was mistaken about his relationship
to anybody else there.  I was so curious to know, that I made up my
mind to have it out with Mr. Peggotty.

'Little Em'ly,' I said, glancing at her.  'She is your daughter,
isn't she, Mr. Peggotty?'

'No, sir.  My brother-in-law, Tom, was her father.'

I couldn't help it.  '- Dead, Mr. Peggotty?' I hinted, after
another respectful silence.

'Drowndead,' said Mr. Peggotty.

I felt the difficulty of resuming the subject, but had not got to
the bottom of it yet, and must get to the bottom somehow.  So I
said:

'Haven't you ANY children, Mr. Peggotty?'

'No, master,' he answered with a short laugh.  'I'm a bacheldore.'

'A bachelor!' I said, astonished.  'Why, who's that, Mr. Peggotty?'
pointing to the person in the apron who was knitting.

'That's Missis Gummidge,' said Mr. Peggotty.

'Gummidge, Mr. Peggotty?'

But at this point Peggotty - I mean my own peculiar Peggotty - made
such impressive motions to me not to ask any more questions, that
I could only sit and look at all the silent company, until it was
time to go to bed.  Then, in the privacy of my own little cabin,
she informed me that Ham and Em'ly were an orphan nephew and niece,
whom my host had at different times adopted in their childhood,
when they were left destitute: and that Mrs. Gummidge was the widow
of his partner in a boat, who had died very poor.  He was but a
poor man himself, said Peggotty, but as good as gold and as true as
steel - those were her similes.  The only subject, she informed me,
on which he ever showed a violent temper or swore an oath, was this
generosity of his; and if it were ever referred to, by any one of
them, he struck the table a heavy blow with his right hand (had
split it on one such occasion), and swore a dreadful oath that he
would be 'Gormed' if he didn't cut and run for good, if it was ever
mentioned again.  It appeared, in answer to my inquiries, that
nobody had the least idea of the etymology of this terrible verb
passive to be gormed; but that they all regarded it as constituting
a most solemn imprecation.

I was very sensible of my entertainer's goodness, and listened to
the women's going to bed in another little crib like mine at the
opposite end of the boat, and to him and Ham hanging up two
hammocks for themselves on the hooks I had noticed in the roof, in
a very luxurious state of mind, enhanced by my being sleepy.  As
slumber gradually stole upon me, I heard the wind howling out at
sea and coming on across the flat so fiercely, that I had a lazy
apprehension of the great deep rising in the night.  But I
bethought myself that I was in a boat, after all; and that a man
like Mr. Peggotty was not a bad person to have on board if anything
did happen.

Nothing happened, however, worse than morning.  Almost as soon as
it shone upon the oyster-shell frame of my mirror I was out of bed,
and out with little Em'ly, picking up stones upon the beach.

'You're quite a sailor, I suppose?' I said to Em'ly.  I don't know
that I supposed anything of the kind, but I felt it an act of
gallantry to say something; and a shining sail close to us made
such a pretty little image of itself, at the moment, in her bright
eye, that it came into my head to say this.

'No,' replied Em'ly, shaking her head, 'I'm afraid of the sea.'

'Afraid!' I said, with a becoming air of boldness, and looking very
big at the mighty ocean.  'I an't!'

'Ah! but it's cruel,' said Em'ly.  'I have seen it very cruel to
some of our men.  I have seen it tear a boat as big as our house,
all to pieces.'

'I hope it wasn't the boat that -'

'That father was drownded in?' said Em'ly.  'No.  Not that one, I
never see that boat.'

'Nor him?' I asked her.

Little Em'ly shook her head.  'Not to remember!'

Here was a coincidence!  I immediately went into an explanation how
I had never seen my own father; and how my mother and I had always
lived by ourselves in the happiest state imaginable, and lived so
then, and always meant to live so; and how my father's grave was in
the churchyard near our house, and shaded by a tree, beneath the
boughs of which I had walked and heard the birds sing many a
pleasant morning.  But there were some differences between Em'ly's
orphanhood and mine, it appeared.  She had lost her mother before
her father; and where her father's grave was no one knew, except
that it was somewhere in the depths of the sea.

'Besides,' said Em'ly, as she looked about for shells and pebbles,
'your father was a gentleman and your mother is a lady; and my
father was a fisherman and my mother was a fisherman's daughter,
and my uncle Dan is a fisherman.'

'Dan is Mr. Peggotty, is he?' said I.

'Uncle Dan - yonder,' answered Em'ly, nodding at the boat-house.

'Yes.  I mean him.  He must be very good, I should think?'

'Good?' said Em'ly.  'If I was ever to be a lady, I'd give him a
sky-blue coat with diamond buttons, nankeen trousers, a red velvet
waistcoat, a cocked hat, a large gold watch, a silver pipe, and a
box of money.'

I said I had no doubt that Mr. Peggotty well deserved these
treasures.  I must acknowledge that I felt it difficult to picture
him quite at his ease in the raiment proposed for him by his
grateful little niece, and that I was particularly doubtful of the
policy of the cocked hat; but I kept these sentiments to myself.

Little Em'ly had stopped and looked up at the sky in her
enumeration of these articles, as if they were a glorious vision. 
We went on again, picking up shells and pebbles.

'You would like to be a lady?' I said.

Emily looked at me, and laughed and nodded 'yes'.

'I should like it very much.  We would all be gentlefolks together,
then.  Me, and uncle, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge.  We wouldn't mind
then, when there comes stormy weather.  - Not for our own sakes, I
mean.  We would for the poor fishermen's, to be sure, and we'd help
'em with money when they come to any hurt.'  This seemed to me to
be a very satisfactory and therefore not at all improbable picture. 
I expressed my pleasure in the contemplation of it, and little
Em'ly was emboldened to say, shyly,

'Don't you think you are afraid of the sea, now?'

It was quiet enough to reassure me, but I have no doubt if I had
seen a moderately large wave come tumbling in, I should have taken
to my heels, with an awful recollection of her drowned relations. 
However, I said 'No,' and I added, 'You don't seem to be either,
though you say you are,' - for she was walking much too near the
brink of a sort of old jetty or wooden causeway we had strolled
upon, and I was afraid of her falling over.

'I'm not afraid in this way,' said little Em'ly.  'But I wake when
it blows, and tremble to think of Uncle Dan and Ham and believe I
hear 'em crying out for help.  That's why I should like so much to
be a lady.  But I'm not afraid in this way.  Not a bit.  Look
here!'

She started from my side, and ran along a jagged timber which
protruded from the place we stood upon, and overhung the deep water
at some height, without the least defence.  The incident is so
impressed on my remembrance, that if I were a draughtsman I could
draw its form here, I dare say, accurately as it was that day, and
little Em'ly springing forward to her destruction (as it appeared
to me), with a look that I have never forgotten, directed far out
to sea.

The light, bold, fluttering little figure turned and came back safe
to me, and I soon laughed at my fears, and at the cry I had
uttered; fruitlessly in any case, for there was no one near.  But
there have been times since, in my manhood, many times there have
been, when I have thought, Is it possible, among the possibilities
of hidden things, that in the sudden rashness of the child and her
wild look so far off, there was any merciful attraction of her into
danger, any tempting her towards him permitted on the part of her
dead father, that her life might have a chance of ending that day? 
There has been a time since when I have wondered whether, if the
life before her could have been revealed to me at a glance, and so
revealed as that a child could fully comprehend it, and if her
preservation could have depended on a motion of my hand, I ought to
have held it up to save her.  There has been a time since - I do
not say it lasted long, but it has been - when I have asked myself
the question, would it have been better for little Em'ly to have
had the waters close above her head that morning in my sight; and
when I have answered Yes, it would have been.

This may be premature.  I have set it down too soon, perhaps.  But
let it stand.

We strolled a long way, and loaded ourselves with things that we
thought curious, and put some stranded starfish carefully back into
the water - I hardly know enough of the race at this moment to be
quite certain whether they had reason to feel obliged to us for
doing so, or the reverse - and then made our way home to Mr.
Peggotty's dwelling.  We stopped under the lee of the
lobster-outhouse to exchange an innocent kiss, and went in to
breakfast glowing with health and pleasure.

'Like two young mavishes,' Mr. Peggotty said.  I knew this meant,
in our local dialect, like two young thrushes, and received it as
a compliment.

Of course I was in love with little Em'ly.  I am sure I loved that
baby quite as truly, quite as tenderly, with greater purity and
more disinterestedness, than can enter into the best love of a
later time of life, high and ennobling as it is.  I am sure my
fancy raised up something round that blue-eyed mite of a child,
which etherealized, and made a very angel of her.  If, any sunny
forenoon, she had spread a little pair of wings and flown away
before my eyes, I don't think I should have regarded it as much
more than I had had reason to expect.

We used to walk about that dim old flat at Yarmouth in a loving
manner, hours and hours.  The days sported by us, as if Time had
not grown up himself yet, but were a child too, and always at play. 
I told Em'ly I adored her, and that unless she confessed she adored
me I should be reduced to the necessity of killing myself with a
sword.  She said she did, and I have no doubt she did.

As to any sense of inequality, or youthfulness, or other difficulty
in our way, little Em'ly and I had no such trouble, because we had
no future.  We made no more provision for growing older, than we
did for growing younger.  We were the admiration of Mrs. Gummidge
and Peggotty, who used to whisper of an evening when we sat,
lovingly, on our little locker side by side, 'Lor! wasn't it
beautiful!'  Mr. Peggotty smiled at us from behind his pipe, and
Ham grinned all the evening and did nothing else.  They had
something of the sort of pleasure in us, I suppose, that they might
have had in a pretty toy, or a pocket model of the Colosseum.

I soon found out that Mrs. Gummidge did not always make herself so
agreeable as she might have been expected to do, under the
circumstances of her residence with Mr. Peggotty.  Mrs. Gummidge's
was rather a fretful disposition, and she whimpered more sometimes
than was comfortable for other parties in so small an
establishment.  I was very sorry for her; but there were moments
when it would have been more agreeable, I thought, if Mrs. Gummidge
had had a convenient apartment of her own to retire to, and had
stopped there until her spirits revived.

Mr. Peggotty went occasionally to a public-house called The Willing
Mind.  I discovered this, by his being out on the second or third
evening of our visit, and by Mrs. Gummidge's looking up at the
Dutch clock, between eight and nine, and saying he was there, and
that, what was more, she had known in the morning he would go
there.

Mrs. Gummidge had been in a low state all day, and had burst into
tears in the forenoon, when the fire smoked.  'I am a lone lorn
creetur',' were Mrs. Gummidge's words, when that unpleasant
occurrence took place, 'and everythink goes contrary with me.'

'Oh, it'll soon leave off,' said Peggotty - I again mean our
Peggotty - 'and besides, you know, it's not more disagreeable to
you than to us.'

'I feel it more,' said Mrs. Gummidge.

It was a very cold day, with cutting blasts of wind.  Mrs.
Gummidge's peculiar corner of the fireside seemed to me to be the
warmest and snuggest in the place, as her chair was certainly the
easiest, but it didn't suit her that day at all.  She was
constantly complaining of the cold, and of its occasioning a
visitation in her back which she called 'the creeps'.  At last she
shed tears on that subject, and said again that she was 'a lone
lorn creetur' and everythink went contrary with her'.

'It is certainly very cold,' said Peggotty.  'Everybody must feel
it so.'

'I feel it more than other people,' said Mrs. Gummidge.

So at dinner; when Mrs. Gummidge was always helped immediately
after me, to whom the preference was given as a visitor of
distinction.  The fish were small and bony, and the potatoes were
a little burnt.  We all acknowledged that we felt this something of
a disappointment; but Mrs. Gummidge said she felt it more than we
did, and shed tears again, and made that former declaration with
great bitterness.

Accordingly, when Mr. Peggotty came home about nine o'clock, this
unfortunate Mrs. Gummidge was knitting in her corner, in a very
wretched and miserable condition.  Peggotty had been working
cheerfully.  Ham had been patching up a great pair of waterboots;
and I, with little Em'ly by my side, had been reading to them. 
Mrs. Gummidge had never made any other remark than a forlorn sigh,
and had never raised her eyes since tea.

'Well, Mates,' said Mr. Peggotty, taking his seat, 'and how are
you?'

We all said something, or looked something, to welcome him, except
Mrs. Gummidge, who only shook her head over her knitting.

'What's amiss?' said Mr. Peggotty, with a clap of his hands. 
'Cheer up, old Mawther!'  (Mr. Peggotty meant old girl.)

Mrs. Gummidge did not appear to be able to cheer up.  She took out
an old black silk handkerchief and wiped her eyes; but instead of
putting it in her pocket, kept it out, and wiped them again, and
still kept it out, ready for use.

'What's amiss, dame?' said Mr. Peggotty.

'Nothing,' returned Mrs. Gummidge.  'You've come from The Willing
Mind, Dan'l?'

'Why yes, I've took a short spell at The Willing Mind tonight,'
said Mr. Peggotty.

'I'm sorry I should drive you there,' said Mrs. Gummidge.

'Drive!  I don't want no driving,' returned Mr. Peggotty with an
honest laugh.  'I only go too ready.'

'Very ready,' said Mrs. Gummidge, shaking her head, and wiping her
eyes.  'Yes, yes, very ready.  I am sorry it should be along of me
that you're so ready.'

'Along o' you!  It an't along o' you!' said Mr. Peggotty.  'Don't
ye believe a bit on it.'

'Yes, yes, it is,' cried Mrs. Gummidge.  'I know what I am.  I know
that I am a lone lorn creetur', and not only that everythink goes
contrary with me, but that I go contrary with everybody.  Yes, yes. 
I feel more than other people do, and I show it more.  It's my
misfortun'.'

I really couldn't help thinking, as I sat taking in all this, that
the misfortune extended to some other members of that family
besides Mrs. Gummidge.  But Mr. Peggotty made no such retort, only
answering with another entreaty to Mrs. Gummidge to cheer up.

'I an't what I could wish myself to be,' said Mrs. Gummidge.  'I am
far from it.  I know what I am.  My troubles has made me contrary. 
I feel my troubles, and they make me contrary.  I wish I didn't
feel 'em, but I do.  I wish I could be hardened to 'em, but I an't. 
I make the house uncomfortable.  I don't wonder at it.  I've made
your sister so all day, and Master Davy.'

Here I was suddenly melted, and roared out, 'No, you haven't, Mrs.
Gummidge,' in great mental distress.

'It's far from right that I should do it,' said Mrs. Gummidge.  'It
an't a fit return.  I had better go into the house and die.  I am
a lone lorn creetur', and had much better not make myself contrary
here.  If thinks must go contrary with me, and I must go contrary
myself, let me go contrary in my parish.  Dan'l, I'd better go into
the house, and die and be a riddance!'

Mrs. Gummidge retired with these words, and betook herself to bed. 
When she was gone, Mr. Peggotty, who had not exhibited a trace of
any feeling but the profoundest sympathy, looked round upon us, and
nodding his head with a lively expression of that sentiment still
animating his face, said in a whisper:

'She's been thinking of the old 'un!'

I did not quite understand what old one Mrs. Gummidge was supposed
to have fixed her mind upon, until Peggotty, on seeing me to bed,
explained that it was the late Mr. Gummidge; and that her brother
always took that for a received truth on such occasions, and that
it always had a moving effect upon him.  Some time after he was in
his hammock that night, I heard him myself repeat to Ham, 'Poor
thing!  She's been thinking of the old 'un!'  And whenever Mrs.
Gummidge was overcome in a similar manner during the remainder of
our stay (which happened some few times), he always said the same
thing in extenuation of the circumstance, and always with the
tenderest commiseration.

So the fortnight slipped away, varied by nothing but the variation
of the tide, which altered Mr. Peggotty's times of going out and
coming in, and altered Ham's engagements also.  When the latter was
unemployed, he sometimes walked with us to show us the boats and
ships, and once or twice he took us for a row.  I don't know why
one slight set of impressions should be more particularly
associated with a place than another, though I believe this obtains
with most people, in reference especially to the associations of
their childhood.  I never hear the name, or read the name, of
Yarmouth, but I am reminded of a certain Sunday morning on the
beach, the bells ringing for church, little Em'ly leaning on my
shoulder, Ham lazily dropping stones into the water, and the sun,
away at sea, just breaking through the heavy mist, and showing us
the ships, like their own shadows.

At last the day came for going home.  I bore up against the
separation from Mr. Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge, but my agony of
mind at leaving little Em'ly was piercing.  We went arm-in-arm to
the public-house where the carrier put up, and I promised, on the
road, to write to her.  (I redeemed that promise afterwards, in
characters larger than those in which apartments are usually
announced in manuscript, as being to let.) We were greatly overcome
at parting; and if ever, in my life, I have had a void made in my
heart, I had one made that day.

Now, all the time I had been on my visit, I had been ungrateful to
my home again, and had thought little or nothing about it.  But I
was no sooner turned towards it, than my reproachful young
conscience seemed to point that way with a ready finger; and I
felt, all the more for the sinking of my spirits, that it was my
nest, and that my mother was my comforter and friend.

This gained upon me as we went along; so that the nearer we drew,
the more familiar the objects became that we passed, the more
excited I was to get there, and to run into her arms.  But
Peggotty, instead of sharing in those transports, tried to check
them (though very kindly), and looked confused and out of sorts.

Blunderstone Rookery would come, however, in spite of her, when the
carrier's horse pleased - and did.  How well I recollect it, on a
cold grey afternoon, with a dull sky, threatening rain!

The door opened, and I looked, half laughing and half crying in my
pleasant agitation, for my mother.  It was not she, but a strange
servant.

'Why, Peggotty!' I said, ruefully, 'isn't she come home?'

'Yes, yes, Master Davy,' said Peggotty.  'She's come home.  Wait a
bit, Master Davy, and I'll - I'll tell you something.'

Between her agitation, and her natural awkwardness in getting out
of the cart, Peggotty was making a most extraordinary festoon of
herself, but I felt too blank and strange to tell her so.  When she
had got down, she took me by the hand; led me, wondering, into the
kitchen; and shut the door.

'Peggotty!' said I, quite frightened.  'What's the matter?'

'Nothing's the matter, bless you, Master Davy dear!' she answered,
assuming an air of sprightliness.

'Something's the matter, I'm sure.  Where's mama?'

'Where's mama, Master Davy?' repeated Peggotty.

'Yes.  Why hasn't she come out to the gate, and what have we come
in here for?  Oh, Peggotty!'  My eyes were full, and I felt as if
I were going to tumble down.

'Bless the precious boy!' cried Peggotty, taking hold of me.  'What
is it?  Speak, my pet!'

'Not dead, too!  Oh, she's not dead, Peggotty?'

Peggotty cried out No! with an astonishing volume of voice; and
then sat down, and began to pant, and said I had given her a turn.

I gave her a hug to take away the turn, or to give her another turn
in the right direction, and then stood before her, looking at her
in anxious inquiry.

'You see, dear, I should have told you before now,' said Peggotty,
'but I hadn't an opportunity.  I ought to have made it, perhaps,
but I couldn't azackly' - that was always the substitute for
exactly, in Peggotty's militia of words - 'bring my mind to it.'

'Go on, Peggotty,' said I, more frightened than before.

'Master Davy,' said Peggotty, untying her bonnet with a shaking
hand, and speaking in a breathless sort of way.  'What do you
think?  You have got a Pa!'

I trembled, and turned white.  Something - I don't know what, or
how - connected with the grave in the churchyard, and the raising
of the dead, seemed to strike me like an unwholesome wind.

'A new one,' said Peggotty.

'A new one?' I repeated.

Peggotty gave a gasp, as if she were swallowing something that was
very hard, and, putting out her hand, said:

'Come and see him.'

'I don't want to see him.'

- 'And your mama,' said Peggotty.

I ceased to draw back, and we went straight to the best parlour,
where she left me.  On one side of the fire, sat my mother; on the
other, Mr. Murdstone.  My mother dropped her work, and arose
hurriedly, but timidly I thought.

'Now, Clara my dear,' said Mr. Murdstone.  'Recollect! control
yourself, always control yourself!  Davy boy, how do you do?'

I gave him my hand.  After a moment of suspense, I went and kissed
my mother: she kissed me, patted me gently on the shoulder, and sat
down again to her work.  I could not look at her, I could not look
at him, I knew quite well that he was looking at us both; and I
turned to the window and looked out there, at some shrubs that were
drooping their heads in the cold.

As soon as I could creep away, I crept upstairs.  My old dear
bedroom was changed, and I was to lie a long way off.  I rambled
downstairs to find anything that was like itself, so altered it all
seemed; and roamed into the yard.  I very soon started back from
there, for the empty dog-kennel was filled up with a great dog -
deep mouthed and black-haired like Him - and he was very angry at
the sight of me, and sprang out to get at me.

CHAPTER 4
I FALL INTO DISGRACE

If the room to which my bed was removed were a sentient thing that
could give evidence, I might appeal to it at this day - who sleeps
there now, I wonder! - to bear witness for me what a heavy heart I
carried to it.  I went up there, hearing the dog in the yard bark
after me all the way while I climbed the stairs; and, looking as
blank and strange upon the room as the room looked upon me, sat
down with my small hands crossed, and thought.

I thought of the oddest things.  Of the shape of the room, of the
cracks in the ceiling, of the paper on the walls, of the flaws in
the window-glass making ripples and dimples on the prospect, of the
washing-stand being rickety on its three legs, and having a
discontented something about it, which reminded me of Mrs. Gummidge
under the influence of the old one.  I was crying all the time,
but, except that I was conscious of being cold and dejected, I am
sure I never thought why I cried.  At last in my desolation I began
to consider that I was dreadfully in love with little Em'ly, and
had been torn away from her to come here where no one seemed to
want me, or to care about me, half as much as she did.  This made
such a very miserable piece of business of it, that I rolled myself
up in a corner of the counterpane, and cried myself to sleep.

I was awoke by somebody saying 'Here he is!' and uncovering my hot
head.  My mother and Peggotty had come to look for me, and it was
one of them who had done it.

'Davy,' said my mother.  'What's the matter?'

I thought it was very strange that she should ask me, and answered,
'Nothing.'  I turned over on my face, I recollect, to hide my
trembling lip, which answered her with greater truth.
'Davy,' said my mother.  'Davy, my child!'

I dare say no words she could have uttered would have affected me
so much, then, as her calling me her child.  I hid my tears in the
bedclothes, and pressed her from me with my hand, when she would
have raised me up.

'This is your doing, Peggotty, you cruel thing!' said my mother. 
'I have no doubt at all about it.  How can you reconcile it to your
conscience, I wonder, to prejudice my own boy against me, or
against anybody who is dear to me?  What do you mean by it,
Peggotty?'

Poor Peggotty lifted up her hands and eyes, and only answered, in
a sort of paraphrase of the grace I usually repeated after dinner,
'Lord forgive you, Mrs. Copperfield, and for what you have said
this minute, may you never be truly sorry!'

'It's enough to distract me,' cried my mother.  'In my honeymoon,
too, when my most inveterate enemy might relent, one would think,
and not envy me a little peace of mind and happiness.  Davy, you
naughty boy!  Peggotty, you savage creature!  Oh, dear me!' cried
my mother, turning from one of us to the other, in her pettish
wilful manner, 'what a troublesome world this is, when one has the
most right to expect it to be as agreeable as possible!'

I felt the touch of a hand that I knew was neither hers nor
Peggotty's, and slipped to my feet at the bed-side.  It was Mr.
Murdstone's hand, and he kept it on my arm as he said:

'What's this?  Clara, my love, have you forgotten? - Firmness, my
dear!'

'I am very sorry, Edward,' said my mother.  'I meant to be very
good, but I am so uncomfortable.'

'Indeed!' he answered.  'That's a bad hearing, so soon, Clara.'

'I say it's very hard I should be made so now,' returned my mother,
pouting; 'and it is - very hard - isn't it?'

He drew her to him, whispered in her ear, and kissed her.  I knew
as well, when I saw my mother's head lean down upon his shoulder,
and her arm touch his neck - I knew as well that he could mould her
pliant nature into any form he chose, as I know, now, that he did
it.

'Go you below, my love,' said Mr. Murdstone.  'David and I will
come down, together.  My friend,' turning a darkening face on
Peggotty, when he had watched my mother out, and dismissed her with
a nod and a smile; 'do you know your mistress's name?'

'She has been my mistress a long time, sir,' answered Peggotty, 'I
ought to know it.'
'That's true,' he answered.  'But I thought I heard you, as I came
upstairs, address her by a name that is not hers.  She has taken
mine, you know.  Will you remember that?'

Peggotty, with some uneasy glances at me, curtseyed herself out of
the room without replying; seeing, I suppose, that she was expected
to go, and had no excuse for remaining.  When we two were left
alone, he shut the door, and sitting on a chair, and holding me
standing before him, looked steadily into my eyes.  I felt my own
attracted, no less steadily, to his.  As I recall our being opposed
thus, face to face, I seem again to hear my heart beat fast and
high.

'David,' he said, making his lips thin, by pressing them together,
'if I have an obstinate horse or dog to deal with, what do you
think I do?'

'I don't know.'

'I beat him.'

I had answered in a kind of breathless whisper, but I felt, in my
silence, that my breath was shorter now.

'I make him wince, and smart.  I say to myself, "I'll conquer that
fellow"; and if it were to cost him all the blood he had, I should
do it.  What is that upon your face?'

'Dirt,' I said.

He knew it was the mark of tears as well as I.  But if he had asked
the question twenty times, each time with twenty blows, I believe
my baby heart would have burst before I would have told him so.

'You have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow,' he
said, with a grave smile that belonged to him, 'and you understood
me very well, I see.  Wash that face, sir, and come down with me.'

He pointed to the washing-stand, which I had made out to be like
Mrs. Gummidge, and motioned me with his head to obey him directly. 
I had little doubt then, and I have less doubt now, that he would
have knocked me down without the least compunction, if I had
hesitated.

'Clara, my dear,' he said, when I had done his bidding, and he
walked me into the parlour, with his hand still on my arm; 'you
will not be made uncomfortable any more, I hope.  We shall soon
improve our youthful humours.'

God help me, I might have been improved for my whole life, I might
have been made another creature perhaps, for life, by a kind word
at that season.  A word of encouragement and explanation, of pity
for my childish ignorance, of welcome home, of reassurance to me
that it was home, might have made me dutiful to him in my heart
henceforth, instead of in my hypocritical outside, and might have
made me respect instead of hate him.  I thought my mother was sorry
to see me standing in the room so scared and strange, and that,
presently, when I stole to a chair, she followed me with her eyes
more sorrowfully still - missing, perhaps, some freedom in my
childish tread - but the word was not spoken, and the time for it
was gone.

We dined alone, we three together.  He seemed to be very fond of my
mother - I am afraid I liked him none the better for that - and she
was very fond of him.  I gathered from what they said, that an
elder sister of his was coming to stay with them, and that she was
expected that evening.  I am not certain whether I found out then,
or afterwards, that, without being actively concerned in any
business, he had some share in, or some annual charge upon the
profits of, a wine-merchant's house in London, with which his
family had been connected from his great-grandfather's time, and in
which his sister had a similar interest; but I may mention it in
this place, whether or no.

After dinner, when we were sitting by the fire, and I was
meditating an escape to Peggotty without having the hardihood to
slip away, lest it should offend the master of the house, a coach
drove up to the garden-gate and he went out to receive the visitor. 
My mother followed him.  I was timidly following her, when she
turned round at the parlour door, in the dusk, and taking me in her
embrace as she had been used to do, whispered me to love my new
father and be obedient to him.  She did this hurriedly and
secretly, as if it were wrong, but tenderly; and, putting out her
hand behind her, held mine in it, until we came near to where he
was standing in the garden, where she let mine go, and drew hers
through his arm.

It was Miss Murdstone who was arrived, and a gloomy-looking lady
she was; dark, like her brother, whom she greatly resembled in face
and voice; and with very heavy eyebrows, nearly meeting over her
large nose, as if, being disabled by the wrongs of her sex from
wearing whiskers, she had carried them to that account.  She
brought with her two uncompromising hard black boxes, with her
initials on the lids in hard brass nails.  When she paid the
coachman she took her money out of a hard steel purse, and she kept
the purse in a very jail of a bag which hung upon her arm by a
heavy chain, and shut up like a bite.  I had never, at that time,
seen such a metallic lady altogether as Miss Murdstone was.

She was brought into the parlour with many tokens of welcome, and
there formally recognized my mother as a new and near relation. 
Then she looked at me, and said:

'Is that your boy, sister-in-law?'

My mother acknowledged me.

'Generally speaking,' said Miss Murdstone, 'I don't like boys.  How
d'ye do, boy?'

Under these encouraging circumstances, I replied that I was very
well, and that I hoped she was the same; with such an indifferent
grace, that Miss Murdstone disposed of me in two words:

'Wants manner!'

Having uttered which, with great distinctness, she begged the
favour of being shown to her room, which became to me from that
time forth a place of awe and dread, wherein the two black boxes
were never seen open or known to be left unlocked, and where (for
I peeped in once or twice when she was out) numerous little steel
fetters and rivets, with which Miss Murdstone embellished herself
when she was dressed, generally hung upon the looking-glass in
formidable array.

As well as I could make out, she had come for good, and had no
intention of ever going again.  She began to 'help' my mother next
morning, and was in and out of the store-closet all day, putting
things to rights, and making havoc in the old arrangements.  Almost
the first remarkable thing I observed in Miss Murdstone was, her
being constantly haunted by a suspicion that the servants had a man
secreted somewhere on the premises.  Under the influence of this
delusion, she dived into the coal-cellar at the most untimely
hours, and scarcely ever opened the door of a dark cupboard without
clapping it to again, in the belief that she had got him.

Though there was nothing very airy about Miss Murdstone, she was a
perfect Lark in point of getting up.  She was up (and, as I believe
to this hour, looking for that man) before anybody in the house was
stirring.  Peggotty gave it as her opinion that she even slept with
one eye open; but I could not concur in this idea; for I tried it
myself after hearing the suggestion thrown out, and found it
couldn't be done.

On the very first morning after her arrival she was up and ringing
her bell at cock-crow.  When my mother came down to breakfast and
was going to make the tea, Miss Murdstone gave her a kind of peck
on the cheek, which was her nearest approach to a kiss, and said:

'Now, Clara, my dear, I am come here, you know, to relieve you of
all the trouble I can.  You're much too pretty and thoughtless' -
my mother blushed but laughed, and seemed not to dislike this
character - 'to have any duties imposed upon you that can be
undertaken by me.  If you'll be so good as give me your keys, my
dear, I'll attend to all this sort of thing in future.'

From that time, Miss Murdstone kept the keys in her own little jail
all day, and under her pillow all night, and my mother had no more
to do with them than I had.

My mother did not suffer her authority to pass from her without a
shadow of protest.  One night when Miss Murdstone had been
developing certain household plans to her brother, of which he
signified his approbation, my mother suddenly began to cry, and
said she thought she might have been consulted.

'Clara!' said Mr. Murdstone sternly.  'Clara!  I wonder at you.'

'Oh, it's very well to say you wonder, Edward!' cried my mother,
'and it's very well for you to talk about firmness, but you
wouldn't like it yourself.'

Firmness, I may observe, was the grand quality on which both Mr.
and Miss Murdstone took their stand.  However I might have
expressed my comprehension of it at that time, if I had been called
upon, I nevertheless did clearly comprehend in my own way, that it
was another name for tyranny; and for a certain gloomy, arrogant,
devil's humour, that was in them both.  The creed, as I should
state it now, was this.  Mr. Murdstone was firm; nobody in his
world was to be so firm as Mr. Murdstone; nobody else in his world
was to be firm at all, for everybody was to be bent to his
firmness.  Miss Murdstone was an exception.  She might be firm, but
only by relationship, and in an inferior and tributary degree.  My
mother was another exception.  She might be firm, and must be; but
only in bearing their firmness, and firmly believing there was no
other firmness upon earth.

'It's very hard,' said my mother, 'that in my own house -'

'My own house?' repeated Mr. Murdstone.  'Clara!'

'OUR own house, I mean,' faltered my mother, evidently frightened
- 'I hope you must know what I mean, Edward - it's very hard that
in YOUR own house I may not have a word to say about domestic
matters.  I am sure I managed very well before we were married. 
There's evidence,' said my mother, sobbing; 'ask Peggotty if I
didn't do very well when I wasn't interfered with!'

'Edward,' said Miss Murdstone, 'let there be an end of this.  I go
tomorrow.'

'Jane Murdstone,' said her brother, 'be silent!  How dare you to
insinuate that you don't know my character better than your words
imply?'

'I am sure,' my poor mother went on, at a grievous disadvantage,
and with many tears, 'I don't want anybody to go.  I should be very
miserable and unhappy if anybody was to go.  I don't ask much.  I
am not unreasonable.  I only want to be consulted sometimes.  I am
very much obliged to anybody who assists me, and I only want to be
consulted as a mere form, sometimes.  I thought you were pleased,
once, with my being a little inexperienced and girlish, Edward - I
am sure you said so - but you seem to hate me for it now, you are
so severe.'

'Edward,' said Miss Murdstone, again, 'let there be an end of this. 
I go tomorrow.'

'Jane Murdstone,' thundered Mr. Murdstone.  'Will you be silent? 
How dare you?'

Miss Murdstone made a jail-delivery of her pocket-handkerchief, and
held it before her eyes.

'Clara,' he continued, looking at my mother, 'you surprise me!  You
astound me!  Yes, I had a satisfaction in the thought of marrying
an inexperienced and artless person, and forming her character, and
infusing into it some amount of that firmness and decision of which
it stood in need.  But when Jane Murdstone is kind enough to come
to my assistance in this endeavour, and to assume, for my sake, a
condition something like a housekeeper's, and when she meets with
a base return -'

'Oh, pray, pray, Edward,' cried my mother, 'don't accuse me of
being ungrateful.  I am sure I am not ungrateful.  No one ever said
I was before.  I have many faults, but not that.  Oh, don't, my
dear!'

'When Jane Murdstone meets, I say,' he went on, after waiting until
my mother was silent, 'with a base return, that feeling of mine is
chilled and altered.'

'Don't, my love, say that!' implored my mother very piteously. 
'Oh, don't, Edward!  I can't bear to hear it.  Whatever I am, I am
affectionate.  I know I am affectionate.  I wouldn't say it, if I
wasn't sure that I am.  Ask Peggotty.  I am sure she'll tell you
I'm affectionate.'

'There is no extent of mere weakness, Clara,' said Mr. Murdstone in
reply, 'that can have the least weight with me.  You lose breath.'

'Pray let us be friends,' said my mother, 'I couldn't live under
coldness or unkindness.  I am so sorry.  I have a great many
defects, I know, and it's very good of you, Edward, with your
strength of mind, to endeavour to correct them for me.  Jane, I
don't object to anything.  I should be quite broken-hearted if you
thought of leaving -' My mother was too much overcome to go on.

'Jane Murdstone,' said Mr. Murdstone to his sister, 'any harsh
words between us are, I hope, uncommon.  It is not my fault that so
unusual an occurrence has taken place tonight.  I was betrayed into
it by another.  Nor is it your fault.  You were betrayed into it by
another.  Let us both try to forget it.  And as this,' he added,
after these magnanimous words, 'is not a fit scene for the boy -
David, go to bed!'

I could hardly find the door, through the tears that stood in my
eyes.  I was so sorry for my mother's distress; but I groped my way
out, and groped my way up to my room in the dark, without even
having the heart to say good night to Peggotty, or to get a candle
from her.  When her coming up to look for me, an hour or so
afterwards, awoke me, she said that my mother had gone to bed
poorly, and that Mr. and Miss Murdstone were sitting alone.

Going down next morning rather earlier than usual, I paused outside
the parlour door, on hearing my mother's voice.  She was very
earnestly and humbly entreating Miss Murdstone's pardon, which that
lady granted, and a perfect reconciliation took place.  I never
knew my mother afterwards to give an opinion on any matter, without
first appealing to Miss Murdstone, or without having first
ascertained by some sure means, what Miss Murdstone's opinion was;
and I never saw Miss Murdstone, when out of temper (she was infirm
that way), move her hand towards her bag as if she were going to
take out the keys and offer to resign them to my mother, without
seeing that my mother was in a terrible fright.

The gloomy taint that was in the Murdstone blood, darkened the
Murdstone religion, which was austere and wrathful.  I have
thought, since, that its assuming that character was a necessary
consequence of Mr. Murdstone's firmness, which wouldn't allow him
to let anybody off from the utmost weight of the severest penalties
he could find any excuse for.  Be this as it may, I well remember
the tremendous visages with which we used to go to church, and the
changed air of the place.  Again, the dreaded Sunday comes round,
and I file into the old pew first, like a guarded captive brought
to a condemned service.  Again, Miss Murdstone, in a black velvet
gown, that looks as if it had been made out of a pall, follows
close upon me; then my mother; then her husband.  There is no
Peggotty now, as in the old time.  Again, I listen to Miss
Murdstone mumbling the responses, and emphasizing all the dread
words with a cruel relish.  Again, I see her dark eyes roll round
the church when she says 'miserable sinners', as if she were
calling all the congregation names.  Again, I catch rare glimpses
of my mother, moving her lips timidly between the two, with one of
them muttering at each ear like low thunder.  Again, I wonder with
a sudden fear whether it is likely that our good old clergyman can
be wrong, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone right, and that all the angels
in Heaven can be destroying angels.  Again, if I move a finger or
relax a muscle of my face, Miss Murdstone pokes me with her
prayer-book, and makes my side ache.

Yes, and again, as we walk home, I note some neighbours looking at
my mother and at me, and whispering.  Again, as the three go on
arm-in-arm, and I linger behind alone, I follow some of those
looks, and wonder if my mother's step be really not so light as I
have seen it, and if the gaiety of her beauty be really almost
worried away.  Again, I wonder whether any of the neighbours call
to mind, as I do, how we used to walk home together, she and I; and
I wonder stupidly about that, all the dreary dismal day.

There had been some talk on occasions of my going to boarding-
school.  Mr. and Miss Murdstone had originated it, and my mother
had of course agreed with them.  Nothing, however, was concluded on
the subject yet.  In the meantime, I learnt lessons at home.
Shall I ever forget those lessons!  They were presided over
nominally by my mother, but really by Mr. Murdstone and his sister,
who were always present, and found them a favourable occasion for
giving my mother lessons in that miscalled firmness, which was the
bane of both our lives.  I believe I was kept at home for that
purpose.  I had been apt enough to learn, and willing enough, when
my mother and I had lived alone together.  I can faintly remember
learning the alphabet at her knee.  To this day, when I look upon
the fat black letters in the primer, the puzzling novelty of their
shapes, and the easy good-nature of O and Q and S, seem to present
themselves again before me as they used to do.  But they recall no
feeling of disgust or reluctance.  On the contrary, I seem to have
walked along a path of flowers as far as the crocodile-book, and to
have been cheered by the gentleness of my mother's voice and manner
all the way.  But these solemn lessons which succeeded those, I
remember as the death-blow of my peace, and a grievous daily
drudgery and misery.  They were very long, very numerous, very hard
- perfectly unintelligible, some of them, to me - and I was
generally as much bewildered by them as I believe my poor mother
was herself.

Let me remember how it used to be, and bring one morning back
again.

I come into the second-best parlour after breakfast, with my books,
and an exercise-book, and a slate.  My mother is ready for me at
her writing-desk, but not half so ready as Mr. Murdstone in his
easy-chair by the window (though he pretends to be reading a book),
or as Miss Murdstone, sitting near my mother stringing steel beads. 
The very sight of these two has such an influence over me, that I
begin to feel the words I have been at infinite pains to get into
my head, all sliding away, and going I don't know where.  I wonder
where they do go, by the by?

I hand the first book to my mother.  Perhaps it is a grammar,
perhaps a history, or geography.  I take a last drowning look at
the page as I give it into her hand, and start off aloud at a
racing pace while I have got it fresh.  I trip over a word.  Mr.
Murdstone looks up.  I trip over another word.  Miss Murdstone
looks up.  I redden, tumble over half-a-dozen words, and stop.  I
think my mother would show me the book if she dared, but she does
not dare, and she says softly:

'Oh, Davy, Davy!'

'Now, Clara,' says Mr. Murdstone, 'be firm with the boy.  Don't
say, "Oh, Davy, Davy!"  That's childish.  He knows his lesson, or
he does not know it.'

'He does NOT know it,' Miss Murdstone interposes awfully.

'I am really afraid he does not,' says my mother.

'Then, you see, Clara,' returns Miss Murdstone, 'you should just
give him the book back, and make him know it.'

'Yes, certainly,' says my mother; 'that is what I intend to do, my
dear Jane.  Now, Davy, try once more, and don't be stupid.'

I obey the first clause of the injunction by trying once more, but
am not so successful with the second, for I am very stupid.  I
tumble down before I get to the old place, at a point where I was
all right before, and stop to think.  But I can't think about the
lesson.  I think of the number of yards of net in Miss Murdstone's
cap, or of the price of Mr. Murdstone's dressing-gown, or any such
ridiculous problem that I have no business with, and don't want to
have anything at all to do with.  Mr. Murdstone makes a movement of
impatience which I have been expecting for a long time.  Miss
Murdstone does the same.  My mother glances submissively at them,
shuts the book, and lays it by as an arrear to be worked out when
my other tasks are done.

There is a pile of these arrears very soon, and it swells like a
rolling snowball.  The bigger it gets, the more stupid I get.  The
case is so hopeless, and I feel that I am wallowing in such a bog
of nonsense, that I give up all idea of getting out, and abandon
myself to my fate.  The despairing way in which my mother and I
look at each other, as I blunder on, is truly melancholy.  But the
greatest effect in these miserable lessons is when my mother
(thinking nobody is observing her) tries to give me the cue by the
motion of her lips.  At that instant, Miss Murdstone, who has been
lying in wait for nothing else all along, says in a deep warning
voice:

'Clara!'

My mother starts, colours, and smiles faintly.  Mr. Murdstone comes
out of his chair, takes the book, throws it at me or boxes my ears
with it, and turns me out of the room by the shoulders.

Even when the lessons are done, the worst is yet to happen, in the
shape of an appalling sum.  This is invented for me, and delivered
to me orally by Mr. Murdstone, and begins, 'If I go into a
cheesemonger's shop, and buy five thousand double-Gloucester
cheeses at fourpence-halfpenny each, present payment' - at which I
see Miss Murdstone secretly overjoyed.  I pore over these cheeses
without any result or enlightenment until dinner-time, when, having
made a Mulatto of myself by getting the dirt of the slate into the
pores of my skin, I have a slice of bread to help me out with the
cheeses, and am considered in disgrace for the rest of the evening.

It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if my unfortunate
studies generally took this course.  I could have done very well if
I had been without the Murdstones; but the influence of the
Murdstones upon me was like the fascination of two snakes on a
wretched young bird.  Even when I did get through the morning with
tolerable credit, there was not much gained but dinner; for Miss
Murdstone never could endure to see me untasked, and if I rashly
made any show of being unemployed, called her brother's attention
to me by saying, 'Clara, my dear, there's nothing like work - give
your boy an exercise'; which caused me to be clapped down to some
new labour, there and then.  As to any recreation with other
children of my age, I had very little of that; for the gloomy
theology of the Murdstones made all children out to be a swarm of
little vipers (though there WAS a child once set in the midst of
the Disciples), and held that they contaminated one another.

The natural result of this treatment, continued, I suppose, for
some six months or more, was to make me sullen, dull, and dogged. 
I was not made the less so by my sense of being daily more and more
shut out and alienated from my mother.  I believe I should have
been almost stupefied but for one circumstance.

It was this.  My father had left a small collection of books in a
little room upstairs, to which I had access (for it adjoined my
own) and which nobody else in our house ever troubled.  From that
blessed little room, Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Humphrey
Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wakefield, Don Quixote, Gil Blas,
and Robinson Crusoe, came out, a glorious host, to keep me company. 
They kept alive my fancy, and my hope of something beyond that
place and time, - they, and the Arabian Nights, and the Tales of
the Genii, - and did me no harm; for whatever harm was in some of
them was not there for me; I knew nothing of it.  It is astonishing
to me now, how I found time, in the midst of my porings and
blunderings over heavier themes, to read those books as I did.  It
is curious to me how I could ever have consoled myself under my
small troubles (which were great troubles to me), by impersonating
my favourite characters in them - as I did - and by putting Mr. and
Miss Murdstone into all the bad ones - which I did too.  I have
been Tom Jones (a child's Tom Jones, a harmless creature) for a
week together.  I have sustained my own idea of Roderick Random for
a month at a stretch, I verily believe.  I had a greedy relish for
a few volumes of Voyages and Travels - I forget what, now - that
were on those shelves; and for days and days I can remember to have
gone about my region of our house, armed with the centre-piece out
of an old set of boot-trees - the perfect realization of Captain
Somebody, of the Royal British Navy, in danger of being beset by
savages, and resolved to sell his life at a great price.  The
Captain never lost dignity, from having his ears boxed with the
Latin Grammar.  I did; but the Captain was a Captain and a hero, in
despite of all the grammars of all the languages in the world, dead
or alive.

This was my only and my constant comfort.  When I think of it, the
picture always rises in my mind, of a summer evening, the boys at
play in the churchyard, and I sitting on my bed, reading as if for
life.  Every barn in the neighbourhood, every stone in the church,
and every foot of the churchyard, had some association of its own,
in my mind, connected with these books, and stood for some locality
made famous in them.  I have seen Tom Pipes go climbing up the
church-steeple; I have watched Strap, with the knapsack on his
back, stopping to rest himself upon the wicket-gate; and I know
that Commodore Trunnion held that club with Mr. Pickle, in the
parlour of our little village alehouse.

The reader now understands, as well as I do, what I was when I came
to that point of my youthful history to which I am now coming
again.

One morning when I went into the parlour with my books, I found my
mother looking anxious, Miss Murdstone looking firm, and Mr.
Murdstone binding something round the bottom of a cane - a lithe
and limber cane, which he left off binding when I came in, and
poised and switched in the air.

'I tell you, Clara,' said Mr. Murdstone, 'I have been often flogged
myself.'

'To be sure; of course,' said Miss Murdstone.

'Certainly, my dear Jane,' faltered my mother, meekly.  'But - but
do you think it did Edward good?'

'Do you think it did Edward harm, Clara?' asked Mr. Murdstone,
gravely.

'That's the point,' said his sister.

To this my mother returned, 'Certainly, my dear Jane,' and said no
more.

I felt apprehensive that I was personally interested in this
dialogue, and sought Mr. Murdstone's eye as it lighted on mine.

'Now, David,' he said - and I saw that cast again as he said it -
'you must be far more careful today than usual.'  He gave the cane
another poise, and another switch; and having finished his
preparation of it, laid it down beside him, with an impressive
look, and took up his book.

This was a good freshener to my presence of mind, as a beginning. 
I felt the words of my lessons slipping off, not one by one, or
line by line, but by the entire page; I tried to lay hold of them;
but they seemed, if I may so express it, to have put skates on, and
to skim away from me with a smoothness there was no checking.

We began badly, and went on worse.  I had come in with an idea of
distinguishing myself rather, conceiving that I was very well
prepared; but it turned out to be quite a mistake.  Book after book
was added to the heap of failures, Miss Murdstone being firmly
watchful of us all the time.  And when we came at last to the five
thousand cheeses (canes he made it that day, I remember), my mother
burst out crying.

'Clara!' said Miss Murdstone, in her warning voice.

'I am not quite well, my dear Jane, I think,' said my mother.

I saw him wink, solemnly, at his sister, as he rose and said,
taking up the cane:

'Why, Jane, we can hardly expect Clara to bear, with perfect
firmness, the worry and torment that David has occasioned her
today.  That would be stoical.  Clara is greatly strengthened and
improved, but we can hardly expect so much from her.  David, you
and I will go upstairs, boy.'

As he took me out at the door, my mother ran towards us.  Miss
Murdstone said, 'Clara! are you a perfect fool?' and interfered. 
I saw my mother stop her ears then, and I heard her crying.

He walked me up to my room slowly and gravely - I am certain he had
a delight in that formal parade of executing justice - and when we
got there, suddenly twisted my head under his arm.

'Mr. Murdstone!  Sir!' I cried to him.  'Don't!  Pray don't beat
me!  I have tried to learn, sir, but I can't learn while you and
Miss Murdstone are by.  I can't indeed!'

'Can't you, indeed, David?' he said.  'We'll try that.'

He had my head as in a vice, but I twined round him somehow, and
stopped him for a moment, entreating him not to beat me.  It was
only a moment that I stopped him, for he cut me heavily an instant
afterwards, and in the same instant I caught the hand with which he
held me in my mouth, between my teeth, and bit it through.  It sets
my teeth on edge to think of it.

He beat me then, as if he would have beaten me to death.  Above all
the noise we made, I heard them running up the stairs, and crying
out - I heard my mother crying out - and Peggotty.  Then he was
gone; and the door was locked outside; and I was lying, fevered and
hot, and torn, and sore, and raging in my puny way, upon the floor.

How well I recollect, when I became quiet, what an unnatural
stillness seemed to reign through the whole house!  How well I
remember, when my smart and passion began to cool, how wicked I
began to feel!

I sat listening for a long while, but there was not a sound.  I
crawled up from the floor, and saw my face in the glass, so
swollen, red, and ugly that it almost frightened me.  My stripes
were sore and stiff, and made me cry afresh, when I moved; but they
were nothing to the guilt I felt.  It lay heavier on my breast than
if I had been a most atrocious criminal, I dare say.

It had begun to grow dark, and I had shut the window (I had been
lying, for the most part, with my head upon the sill, by turns
crying, dozing, and looking listlessly out), when the key was
turned, and Miss Murdstone came in with some bread and meat, and
milk.  These she put down upon the table without a word, glaring at
me the while with exemplary firmness, and then retired, locking the
door after her.

Long after it was dark I sat there, wondering whether anybody else
would come.  When this appeared improbable for that night, I
undressed, and went to bed; and, there, I began to wonder fearfully
what would be done to me.  Whether it was a criminal act that I had
committed?  Whether I should be taken into custody, and sent to
prison?  Whether I was at all in danger of being hanged?

I never shall forget the waking, next morning; the being cheerful
and fresh for the first moment, and then the being weighed down by
the stale and dismal oppression of remembrance.  Miss Murdstone
reappeared before I was out of bed; told me, in so many words, that
I was free to walk in the garden for half an hour and no longer;
and retired, leaving the door open, that I might avail myself of
that permission.

I did so, and did so every morning of my imprisonment, which lasted
five days.  If I could have seen my mother alone, I should have
gone down on my knees to her and besought her forgiveness; but I
saw no one, Miss Murdstone excepted, during the whole time - except
at evening prayers in the parlour; to which I was escorted by Miss
Murdstone after everybody else was placed; where I was stationed,
a young outlaw, all alone by myself near the door; and whence I was
solemnly conducted by my jailer, before any one arose from the
devotional posture.  I only observed that my mother was as far off
from me as she could be, and kept her face another way so that I
never saw it; and that Mr. Murdstone's hand was bound up in a large
linen wrapper.

The length of those five days I can convey no idea of to any one. 
They occupy the place of years in my remembrance.  The way in which
I listened to all the incidents of the house that made themselves
audible to me; the ringing of bells, the opening and shutting of
doors, the murmuring of voices, the footsteps on the stairs; to any
laughing, whistling, or singing, outside, which seemed more dismal
than anything else to me in my solitude and disgrace - the
uncertain pace of the hours, especially at night, when I would wake
thinking it was morning, and find that the family were not yet gone
to bed, and that all the length of night had yet to come - the
depressed dreams and nightmares I had - the return of day, noon,
afternoon, evening, when the boys played in the churchyard, and I
watched them from a distance within the room, being ashamed to show
myself at the window lest they should know I was a prisoner - the
strange sensation of never hearing myself speak - the fleeting
intervals of something like cheerfulness, which came with eating
and drinking, and went away with it - the setting in of rain one
evening, with a fresh smell, and its coming down faster and faster
between me and the church, until it and gathering night seemed to
quench me in gloom, and fear, and remorse - all this appears to
have gone round and round for years instead of days, it is so
vividly and strongly stamped on my remembrance.
On the last night of my restraint, I was awakened by hearing my own
name spoken in a whisper.  I started up in bed, and putting out my
arms in the dark, said:

'Is that you, Peggotty?'

There was no immediate answer, but presently I heard my name again,
in a tone so very mysterious and awful, that I think I should have
gone into a fit, if it had not occurred to me that it must have
come through the keyhole.

I groped my way to the door, and putting my own lips to the
keyhole, whispered: 'Is that you, Peggotty dear?'

'Yes, my own precious Davy,' she replied.  'Be as soft as a mouse,
or the Cat'll hear us.'

I understood this to mean Miss Murdstone, and was sensible of the
urgency of the case; her room being close by.

'How's mama, dear Peggotty?  Is she very angry with me?'

I could hear Peggotty crying softly on her side of the keyhole, as
I was doing on mine, before she answered.  'No.  Not very.'

'What is going to be done with me, Peggotty dear?  Do you know?'

'School.  Near London,' was Peggotty's answer.  I was obliged to
get her to repeat it, for she spoke it the first time quite down my
throat, in consequence of my having forgotten to take my mouth away
from the keyhole and put my ear there; and though her words tickled
me a good deal, I didn't hear them.

'When, Peggotty?'

'Tomorrow.'

'Is that the reason why Miss Murdstone took the clothes out of my
drawers?' which she had done, though I have forgotten to mention
it.

'Yes,' said Peggotty.  'Box.'

'Shan't I see mama?'

'Yes,' said Peggotty.  'Morning.'

Then Peggotty fitted her mouth close to the keyhole, and delivered
these words through it with as much feeling and earnestness as a
keyhole has ever been the medium of communicating, I will venture
to assert: shooting in each broken little sentence in a convulsive
little burst of its own.

'Davy, dear.  If I ain't been azackly as intimate with you. 
Lately, as I used to be.  It ain't because I don't love you.  just
as well and more, my pretty poppet.  It's because I thought it
better for you.  And for someone else besides.  Davy, my darling,
are you listening?  Can you hear?'

'Ye-ye-ye-yes, Peggotty!' I sobbed.

'My own!' said Peggotty, with infinite compassion.  'What I want to
say, is.  That you must never forget me.  For I'll never forget
you.  And I'll take as much care of your mama, Davy.  As ever I
took of you.  And I won't leave her.  The day may come when she'll
be glad to lay her poor head.  On her stupid, cross old Peggotty's
arm again.  And I'll write to you, my dear.  Though I ain't no
scholar.  And I'll - I'll -' Peggotty fell to kissing the keyhole,
as she couldn't kiss me.

'Thank you, dear Peggotty!' said I.  'Oh, thank you!  Thank you! 
Will you promise me one thing, Peggotty?  Will you write and tell
Mr. Peggotty and little Em'ly, and Mrs. Gummidge and Ham, that I am
not so bad as they might suppose, and that I sent 'em all my love
- especially to little Em'ly?  Will you, if you please, Peggotty?'

The kind soul promised, and we both of us kissed the keyhole with
the greatest affection - I patted it with my hand, I recollect, as
if it had been her honest face - and parted.  From that night there
grew up in my breast a feeling for Peggotty which I cannot very
well define.  She did not replace my mother; no one could do that;
but she came into a vacancy in my heart, which closed upon her, and
I felt towards her something I have never felt for any other human
being.  It was a sort of comical affection, too; and yet if she had
died, I cannot think what I should have done, or how I should have
acted out the tragedy it would have been to me.

In the morning Miss Murdstone appeared as usual, and told me I was
going to school; which was not altogether such news to me as she
supposed.  She also informed me that when I was dressed, I was to
come downstairs into the parlour, and have my breakfast.  There, I
found my mother, very pale and with red eyes: into whose arms I
ran, and begged her pardon from my suffering soul.

'Oh, Davy!' she said.  'That you could hurt anyone I love!  Try to
be better, pray to be better!  I forgive you; but I am so grieved,
Davy, that you should have such bad passions in your heart.'

They had persuaded her that I was a wicked fellow, and she was more
sorry for that than for my going away.  I felt it sorely.  I tried
to eat my parting breakfast, but my tears dropped upon my bread-
and-butter, and trickled into my tea.  I saw my mother look at me
sometimes, and then glance at the watchful Miss Murdstone, and than
look down, or look away.

'Master Copperfield's box there!' said Miss Murdstone, when wheels
were heard at the gate.

I looked for Peggotty, but it was not she; neither she nor Mr.
Murdstone appeared.  My former acquaintance, the carrier, was at
the door.  the box was taken out to his cart, and lifted in.

'Clara!' said Miss Murdstone, in her warning note.

'Ready, my dear Jane,' returned my mother.  'Good-bye, Davy.  You
are going for your own good.  Good-bye, my child.  You will come
home in the holidays, and be a better boy.'

'Clara!' Miss Murdstone repeated.

'Certainly, my dear Jane,' replied my mother, who was holding me. 
'I forgive you, my dear boy.  God bless you!'

'Clara!' Miss Murdstone repeated.

Miss Murdstone was good enough to take me out to the cart, and to
say on the way that she hoped I would repent, before I came to a
bad end; and then I got into the cart, and the lazy horse walked
off with it.

CHAPTER 5
I AM SENT AWAY FROM HOME

We might have gone about half a mile, and my pocket-handkerchief
was quite wet through, when the carrier stopped short.  Looking out
to ascertain for what, I saw, to MY amazement, Peggotty burst from
a hedge and climb into the cart.  She took me in both her arms, and
squeezed me to her stays until the pressure on my nose was
extremely painful, though I never thought of that till afterwards
when I found it very tender.  Not a single word did Peggotty speak. 
Releasing one of her arms, she put it down in her pocket to the
elbow, and brought out some paper bags of cakes which she crammed
into my pockets, and a purse which she put into my hand, but not
one word did she say.  After another and a final squeeze with both
arms, she got down from the cart and ran away; and, my belief is,
and has always been, without a solitary button on her gown.  I
picked up one, of several that were rolling about, and treasured it
as a keepsake for a long time.

The carrier looked at me, as if to inquire if she were coming back. 
I shook my head, and said I thought not.  'Then come up,' said the
carrier to the lazy horse; who came up accordingly.

Having by this time cried as much as I possibly could, I began to
think it was of no use crying any more, especially as neither
Roderick Random, nor that Captain in the Royal British Navy, had
ever cried, that I could remember, in trying situations.  The
carrier, seeing me in this resolution, proposed that my pocket-
handkerchief should be spread upon the horse's back to dry.  I
thanked him, and assented; and particularly small it looked, under
those circumstances.

I had now leisure to examine the purse.  It was a stiff leather
purse, with a snap, and had three bright shillings in it, which
Peggotty had evidently polished up with whitening, for my greater
delight.  But its most precious contents were two half-crowns
folded together in a bit of paper, on which was written, in my
mother's hand, 'For Davy.  With my love.'  I was so overcome by
this, that I asked the carrier to be so good as to reach me my
pocket-handkerchief again; but he said he thought I had better do
without it, and I thought I really had, so I wiped my eyes on my
sleeve and stopped myself.

For good, too; though, in consequence of my previous emotions, I
was still occasionally seized with a stormy sob.  After we had
jogged on for some little time, I asked the carrier if he was going
all the way.

'All the way where?' inquired the carrier.

'There,' I said.

'Where's there?' inquired the carrier.

'Near London,' I said.

'Why that horse,' said the carrier, jerking the rein to point him
out, 'would be deader than pork afore he got over half the ground.'

'Are you only going to Yarmouth then?' I asked.

'That's about it,' said the carrier.  'And there I shall take you
to the stage-cutch, and the stage-cutch that'll take you to -
wherever it is.'

As this was a great deal for the carrier (whose name was Mr.
Barkis) to say - he being, as I observed in a former chapter, of a
phlegmatic temperament, and not at all conversational - I offered
him a cake as a mark of attention, which he ate at one gulp,
exactly like an elephant, and which made no more impression on his
big face than it would have done on an elephant's.

'Did SHE make 'em, now?' said Mr. Barkis, always leaning forward,
in his slouching way, on the footboard of the cart with an arm on
each knee.

'Peggotty, do you mean, sir?'

'Ah!' said Mr. Barkis.  'Her.'

'Yes.  She makes all our pastry, and does all our cooking.'

'Do she though?' said Mr. Barkis.
He made up his mouth as if to whistle, but he didn't whistle.  He
sat looking at the horse's ears, as if he saw something new there;
and sat so, for a considerable time.  By and by, he said:

'No sweethearts, I b'lieve?'

'Sweetmeats did you say, Mr. Barkis?'  For I thought he wanted
something else to eat, and had pointedly alluded to that
description of refreshment.

'Hearts,' said Mr. Barkis.  'Sweet hearts; no person walks with
her!'

'With Peggotty?'

'Ah!' he said.  'Her.'

'Oh, no.  She never had a sweetheart.'

'Didn't she, though!' said Mr. Barkis.

Again he made up his mouth to whistle, and again he didn't whistle,
but sat looking at the horse's ears.

'So she makes,' said Mr. Barkis, after a long interval of
reflection, 'all the apple parsties, and doos all the cooking, do
she?'

I replied that such was the fact.

'Well.  I'll tell you what,' said Mr. Barkis.  'P'raps you might be
writin' to her?'

'I shall certainly write to her,' I rejoined.

'Ah!' he said, slowly turning his eyes towards me.  'Well!  If you
was writin' to her, p'raps you'd recollect to say that Barkis was
willin'; would you?'

'That Barkis is willing,' I repeated, innocently.  'Is that all the
message?'

'Ye-es,' he said, considering.  'Ye-es.  Barkis is willin'.'

'But you will be at Blunderstone again tomorrow, Mr. Barkis,' I
said, faltering a little at the idea of my being far away from it
then, and could give your own message so much better.'

As he repudiated this suggestion, however, with a jerk of his head,
and once more confirmed his previous request by saying, with
profound gravity, 'Barkis is willin'.  That's the message,' I
readily undertook its transmission.  While I was waiting for the
coach in the hotel at Yarmouth that very afternoon, I procured a
sheet of paper and an inkstand, and wrote a note to Peggotty, which
ran thus: 'My dear Peggotty.  I have come here safe.  Barkis is
willing.  My love to mama.  Yours affectionately.  P.S.  He says he
particularly wants you to know - BARKIS IS WILLING.'

When I had taken this commission on myself prospectively, Mr.
Barkis relapsed into perfect silence; and I, feeling quite worn out
by all that had happened lately, lay down on a sack in the cart and
fell asleep.  I slept soundly until we got to Yarmouth; which was
so entirely new and strange to me in the inn-yard to which we
drove, that I at once abandoned a latent hope I had had of meeting
with some of Mr. Peggotty's family there, perhaps even with little
Em'ly herself.

The coach was in the yard, shining very much all over, but without
any horses to it as yet; and it looked in that state as if nothing
was more unlikely than its ever going to London.  I was thinking
this, and wondering what would ultimately become of my box, which
Mr. Barkis had put down on the yard-pavement by the pole (he having
driven up the yard to turn his cart), and also what would
ultimately become of me, when a lady looked out of a bow-window
where some fowls and joints of meat were hanging up, and said:

'Is that the little gentleman from Blunderstone?'

'Yes, ma'am,' I said.

'What name?' inquired the lady.

'Copperfield, ma'am,' I said.

'That won't do,' returned the lady.  'Nobody's dinner is paid for
here, in that name.'

'Is it Murdstone, ma'am?' I said.

'If you're Master Murdstone,' said the lady, 'why do you go and
give another name, first?'

I explained to the lady how it was, who than rang a bell, and
called out, 'William! show the coffee-room!' upon which a waiter
came running out of a kitchen on the opposite side of the yard to
show it, and seemed a good deal surprised when he was only to show
it to me.

It was a large long room with some large maps in it.  I doubt if I
could have felt much stranger if the maps had been real foreign
countries, and I cast away in the middle of them.  I felt it was
taking a liberty to sit down, with my cap in my hand, on the corner
of the chair nearest the door; and when the waiter laid a cloth on
purpose for me, and put a set of castors on it, I think I must have
turned red all over with modesty.

He brought me some chops, and vegetables, and took the covers off
in such a bouncing manner that I was afraid I must have given him
some offence.  But he greatly relieved my mind by putting a chair
for me at the table, and saying, very affably, 'Now, six-foot! come
on!'

I thanked him, and took my seat at the board; but found it
extremely difficult to handle my knife and fork with anything like
dexterity, or to avoid splashing myself with the gravy, while he
was standing opposite, staring so hard, and making me blush in the
most dreadful manner every time I caught his eye.  After watching
me into the second chop, he said:

'There's half a pint of ale for you.  Will you have it now?'

I thanked him and said, 'Yes.'  Upon which he poured it out of a
jug into a large tumbler, and held it up against the light, and
made it look beautiful.

'My eye!' he said.  'It seems a good deal, don't it?'

'It does seem a good deal,' I answered with a smile.  For it was
quite delightful to me, to find him so pleasant.  He was a
twinkling-eyed, pimple-faced man, with his hair standing upright
all over his head; and as he stood with one arm a-kimbo, holding up
the glass to the light with the other hand, he looked quite
friendly.

'There was a gentleman here, yesterday,' he said - 'a stout
gentleman, by the name of Topsawyer - perhaps you know him?'

'No,' I said, 'I don't think -'

'In breeches and gaiters, broad-brimmed hat, grey coat, speckled
choker,' said the waiter.

'No,' I said bashfully, 'I haven't the pleasure -'

'He came in here,' said the waiter, looking at the light through
the tumbler, 'ordered a glass of this ale - WOULD order it - I told
him not - drank it, and fell dead.  It was too old for him.  It
oughtn't to be drawn; that's the fact.'

I was very much shocked to hear of this melancholy accident, and
said I thought I had better have some water.

'Why you see,' said the waiter, still looking at the light through
the tumbler, with one of his eyes shut up, 'our people don't like
things being ordered and left.  It offends 'em.  But I'll drink it,
if you like.  I'm used to it, and use is everything.  I don't think
it'll hurt me, if I throw my head back, and take it off quick. 
Shall I?'

I replied that he would much oblige me by drinking it, if he
thought he could do it safely, but by no means otherwise.  When he
did throw his head back, and take it off quick, I had a horrible
fear, I confess, of seeing him meet the fate of the lamented Mr.
Topsawyer, and fall lifeless on the carpet.  But it didn't hurt
him.  On the contrary, I thought he seemed the fresher for it.

'What have we got here?' he said, putting a fork into my dish. 
'Not chops?'

'Chops,' I said.

'Lord bless my soul!' he exclaimed, 'I didn't know they were chops. 
Why, a chop's the very thing to take off the bad effects of that
beer!  Ain't it lucky?'

So he took a chop by the bone in one hand, and a potato in the
other, and ate away with a very good appetite, to my extreme
satisfaction.  He afterwards took another chop, and another potato;
and after that, another chop and another potato.  When we had done,
he brought me a pudding, and having set it before me, seemed to
ruminate, and to become absent in his mind for some moments.

'How's the pie?' he said, rousing himself.

'It's a pudding,' I made answer.

'Pudding!' he exclaimed.  'Why, bless me, so it is!  What!' looking
at it nearer.  'You don't mean to say it's a batter-pudding!'

'Yes, it is indeed.'

'Why, a batter-pudding,' he said, taking up a table-spoon, 'is my
favourite pudding!  Ain't that lucky?  Come on, little 'un, and
let's see who'll get most.'

The waiter certainly got most.  He entreated me more than once to
come in and win, but what with his table-spoon to my tea-spoon, his
dispatch to my dispatch, and his appetite to my appetite, I was
left far behind at the first mouthful, and had no chance with him. 
I never saw anyone enjoy a pudding so much, I think; and he
laughed, when it was all gone, as if his enjoyment of it lasted
still.

Finding him so very friendly and companionable, it was then that I
asked for the pen and ink and paper, to write to Peggotty.  He not
only brought it immediately, but was good enough to look over me
while I wrote the letter.  When I had finished it, he asked me
where I was going to school.

I said, 'Near London,' which was all I knew.

'Oh! my eye!' he said, looking very low-spirited, 'I am sorry for
that.'

'Why?' I asked him.

'Oh, Lord!' he said, shaking his head, 'that's the school where
they broke the boy's ribs - two ribs - a little boy he was.  I
should say he was - let me see - how old are you, about?'

I told him between eight and nine.

'That's just his age,' he said.  'He was eight years and six months
old when they broke his first rib; eight years and eight months old
when they broke his second, and did for him.'

I could not disguise from myself, or from the waiter, that this was
an uncomfortable coincidence, and inquired how it was done.  His
answer was not cheering to my spirits, for it consisted of two
dismal words, 'With whopping.'

The blowing of the coach-horn in the yard was a seasonable
diversion, which made me get up and hesitatingly inquire, in the
mingled pride and diffidence of having a purse (which I took out of
my pocket), if there were anything to pay.

'There's a sheet of letter-paper,' he returned.  'Did you ever buy
a sheet of letter-paper?'

I could not remember that I ever had.

'It's dear,' he said, 'on account of the duty.  Threepence.  That's
the way we're taxed in this country.  There's nothing else, except
the waiter.  Never mind the ink.  I lose by that.'

'What should you - what should I - how much ought I to - what would
it be right to pay the waiter, if you please?' I stammered,
blushing.

'If I hadn't a family, and that family hadn't the cowpock,' said
the waiter, 'I wouldn't take a sixpence.  If I didn't support a
aged pairint, and a lovely sister,' - here the waiter was greatly
agitated - 'I wouldn't take a farthing.  If I had a good place, and
was treated well here, I should beg acceptance of a trifle, instead
of taking of it.  But I live on broken wittles - and I sleep on the
coals' - here the waiter burst into tears.

I was very much concerned for his misfortunes, and felt that any
recognition short of ninepence would be mere brutality and hardness
of heart.  Therefore I gave him one of my three bright shillings,
which he received with much humility and veneration, and spun up
with his thumb, directly afterwards, to try the goodness of.

It was a little disconcerting to me, to find, when I was being
helped up behind the coach, that I was supposed to have eaten all
the dinner without any assistance.  I discovered this, from
overhearing the lady in the bow-window say to the guard, 'Take care
of that child, George, or he'll burst!' and from observing that the
women-servants who were about the place came out to look and giggle
at me as a young phenomenon.  My unfortunate friend the waiter, who
had quite recovered his spirits, did not appear to be disturbed by
this, but joined in the general admiration without being at all
confused.  If I had any doubt of him, I suppose this half awakened
it; but I am inclined to believe that with the simple confidence of
a child, and the natural reliance of a child upon superior years
(qualities I am very sorry any children should prematurely change
for worldly wisdom), I had no serious mistrust of him on the whole,
even then.

I felt it rather hard, I must own, to be made, without deserving
it, the subject of jokes between the coachman and guard as to the
coach drawing heavy behind, on account of my sitting there, and as
to the greater expediency of my travelling by waggon.  The story of
my supposed appetite getting wind among the outside passengers,
they were merry upon it likewise; and asked me whether I was going
to be paid for, at school, as two brothers or three, and whether I
was contracted for, or went upon the regular terms; with other
pleasant questions.  But the worst of it was, that I knew I should
be ashamed to eat anything, when an opportunity offered, and that,
after a rather light dinner, I should remain hungry all night - for
I had left my cakes behind, at the hotel, in my hurry.  My
apprehensions were realized.  When we stopped for supper I couldn't
muster courage to take any, though I should have liked it very
much, but sat by the fire and said I didn't want anything.  This
did not save me from more jokes, either; for a husky-voiced
gentleman with a rough face, who had been eating out of a
sandwich-box nearly all the way, except when he had been drinking
out of a bottle, said I was like a boa-constrictor who took enough
at one meal to last him a long time; after which, he actually
brought a rash out upon himself with boiled beef.

We had started from Yarmouth at three o'clock in the afternoon, and
we were due in London about eight next morning.  It was Mid-summer
weather, and the evening was very pleasant.  When we passed through
a village, I pictured to myself what the insides of the houses were
like, and what the inhabitants were about; and when boys came
running after us, and got up behind and swung there for a little
way, I wondered whether their fathers were alive, and whether they
Were happy at home.  I had plenty to think of, therefore, besides
my mind running continually on the kind of place I was going to -
which was an awful speculation.  Sometimes, I remember, I resigned
myself to thoughts of home and Peggotty; and to endeavouring, in a
confused blind way, to recall how I had felt, and what sort of boy
I used to be, before I bit Mr. Murdstone: which I couldn't satisfy
myself about by any means, I seemed to have bitten him in such a
remote antiquity.

The night was not so pleasant as the evening, for it got chilly;
and being put between two gentlemen (the rough-faced one and
another) to prevent my tumbling off the coach, I was nearly
smothered by their falling asleep, and completely blocking me up. 
They squeezed me so hard sometimes, that I could not help crying
out, 'Oh!  If you please!' - which they didn't like at all, because
it woke them.  Opposite me was an elderly lady in a great fur
cloak, who looked in the dark more like a haystack than a lady, she
was wrapped up to such a degree.  This lady had a basket with her,
and she hadn't known what to do with it, for a long time, until she
found that on account of my legs being short, it could go
underneath me.  It cramped and hurt me so, that it made me
perfectly miserable; but if I moved in the least, and made a glass
that was in the basket rattle against something else (as it was
sure to do), she gave me the cruellest poke with her foot, and
said, 'Come, don't YOU fidget.  YOUR bones are young enough, I'm
sure!'

At last the sun rose, and then my companions seemed to sleep
easier.  The difficulties under which they had laboured all night,
and which had found utterance in the most terrific gasps and
snorts, are not to be conceived.  As the sun got higher, their
sleep became lighter, and so they gradually one by one awoke.  I
recollect being very much surprised by the feint everybody made,
then, of not having been to sleep at all, and by the uncommon
indignation with which everyone repelled the charge.  I labour
under the same kind of astonishment to this day, having invariably
observed that of all human weaknesses, the one to which our common
nature is the least disposed to confess (I cannot imagine why) is
the weakness of having gone to sleep in a coach.

What an amazing place London was to me when I saw it in the
distance, and how I believed all the adventures of all my favourite
heroes to be constantly enacting and re-enacting there, and how I
vaguely made it out in my own mind to be fuller of wonders and
wickedness than all the cities of the earth, I need not stop here
to relate.  We approached it by degrees, and got, in due time, to
the inn in the Whitechapel district, for which we were bound.  I
forget whether it was the Blue Bull, or the Blue Boar; but I know
it was the Blue Something, and that its likeness was painted up on
the back of the coach.

The guard's eye lighted on me as he was getting down, and he said
at the booking-office door:

'Is there anybody here for a yoongster booked in the name of
Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, to be left till called
for?'

Nobody answered.

'Try Copperfield, if you please, sir,' said I, looking helplessly
down.

'Is there anybody here for a yoongster, booked in the name of
Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, but owning to the name of
Copperfield, to be left till called for?' said the guard.  'Come!
IS there anybody?'

No.  There was nobody.  I looked anxiously around; but the inquiry
made no impression on any of the bystanders, if I except a man in
gaiters, with one eye, who suggested that they had better put a
brass collar round my neck, and tie me up in the stable.

A ladder was brought, and I got down after the lady, who was like
a haystack: not daring to stir, until her basket was removed.  The
coach was clear of passengers by that time, the luggage was very
soon cleared out, the horses had been taken out before the luggage,
and now the coach itself was wheeled and backed off by some
hostlers, out of the way.  Still, nobody appeared, to claim the
dusty youngster from Blunderstone, Suffolk.

More solitary than Robinson Crusoe, who had nobody to look at him
and see that he was solitary, I went into the booking-office, and,
by invitation of the clerk on duty, passed behind the counter, and
sat down on the scale at which they weighed the luggage.  Here, as
I sat looking at the parcels, packages, and books, and inhaling the
smell of stables (ever since associated with that morning), a
procession of most tremendous considerations began to march through
my mind.  Supposing nobody should ever fetch me, how long would
they consent to keep me there?  Would they keep me long enough to
spend seven shillings?  Should I sleep at night in one of those
wooden bins, with the other luggage, and wash myself at the pump in
the yard in the morning; or should I be turned out every night, and
expected to come again to be left till called for, when the office
opened next day?  Supposing there was no mistake in the case, and
Mr. Murdstone had devised this plan to get rid of me, what should
I do?  If they allowed me to remain there until my seven shillings
were spent, I couldn't hope to remain there when I began to starve. 
That would obviously be inconvenient and unpleasant to the
customers, besides entailing on the Blue Whatever-it-was, the risk
of funeral expenses.  If I started off at once, and tried to walk
back home, how could I ever find my way, how could I ever hope to
walk so far, how could I make sure of anyone but Peggotty, even if
I got back?  If I found out the nearest proper authorities, and
offered myself to go for a soldier, or a sailor, I was such a
little fellow that it was most likely they wouldn't take me in. 
These thoughts, and a hundred other such thoughts, turned me
burning hot, and made me giddy with apprehension and dismay.  I was
in the height of my fever when a man entered and whispered to the
clerk, who presently slanted me off the scale, and pushed me over
to him, as if I were weighed, bought, delivered, and paid for.

As I went out of the office, hand in hand with this new
acquaintance, I stole a look at him.  He was a gaunt, sallow young
man, with hollow cheeks, and a chin almost as black as Mr.
Murdstone's; but there the likeness ended, for his whiskers were
shaved off, and his hair, instead of being glossy, was rusty and
dry.  He was dressed in a suit of black clothes which were rather
rusty and dry too, and rather short in the sleeves and legs; and he
had a white neck-kerchief on, that was not over-clean.  I did not,
and do not, suppose that this neck-kerchief was all the linen he
wore, but it was all he showed or gave any hint of.

'You're the new boy?' he said.
'Yes, sir,' I said.

I supposed I was.  I didn't know.

'I'm one of the masters at Salem House,' he said.

I made him a bow and felt very much overawed.  I was so ashamed to
allude to a commonplace thing like my box, to a scholar and a
master at Salem House, that we had gone some little distance from
the yard before I had the hardihood to mention it.  We turned back,
on my humbly insinuating that it might be useful to me hereafter;
and he told the clerk that the carrier had instructions to call for
it at noon.

'If you please, sir,' I said, when we had accomplished about the
same distance as before, 'is it far?'

'It's down by Blackheath,' he said.

'Is that far, sir?' I diffidently asked.

'It's a good step,' he said.  'We shall go by the stage-coach. 
It's about six miles.'

I was so faint and tired, that the idea of holding out for six
miles more, was too much for me.  I took heart to tell him that I
had had nothing all night, and that if he would allow me to buy
something to eat, I should be very much obliged to him.  He
appeared surprised at this - I see him stop and look at me now -
and after considering for a few moments, said he wanted to call on
an old person who lived not far off, and that the best way would be
for me to buy some bread, or whatever I liked best that was
wholesome, and make my breakfast at her house, where we could get
some milk.

Accordingly we looked in at a baker's window, and after I had made
a series of proposals to buy everything that was bilious in the
shop, and he had rejected them one by one, we decided in favour of
a nice little loaf of brown bread, which cost me threepence.  Then,
at a grocer's shop, we bought an egg and a slice of streaky bacon;
which still left what I thought a good deal of change, out of the
second of the bright shillings, and made me consider London a very
cheap place.  These provisions laid in, we went on through a great
noise and uproar that confused my weary head beyond description,
and over a bridge which, no doubt, was London Bridge (indeed I
think he told me so, but I was half asleep), until we came to the
poor person's house, which was a part of some alms-houses, as I
knew by their look, and by an inscription on a stone over the gate
which said they were established for twenty-five poor women.

The Master at Salem House lifted the latch of one of a number of
little black doors that were all alike, and had each a little
diamond-paned window on one side, and another little diamond- paned
window above; and we went into the little house of one of these
poor old women, who was blowing a fire to make a little saucepan
boil.  On seeing the master enter, the old woman stopped with the
bellows on her knee, and said something that I thought sounded like
'My Charley!' but on seeing me come in too, she got up, and rubbing
her hands made a confused sort of half curtsey.

'Can you cook this young gentleman's breakfast for him, if you
please?' said the Master at Salem House.

'Can I?' said the old woman.  'Yes can I, sure!'

'How's Mrs. Fibbitson today?' said the Master, looking at another
old woman in a large chair by the fire, who was such a bundle of
clothes that I feel grateful to this hour for not having sat upon
her by mistake.

'Ah, she's poorly,' said the first old woman.  'It's one of her bad
days.  If the fire was to go out, through any accident, I verily
believe she'd go out too, and never come to life again.'

As they looked at her, I looked at her also.  Although it was a
warm day, she seemed to think of nothing but the fire.  I fancied
she was jealous even of the saucepan on it; and I have reason to
know that she took its impressment into the service of boiling my
egg and broiling my bacon, in dudgeon; for I saw her, with my own
discomfited eyes, shake her fist at me once, when those culinary
operations were going on, and no one else was looking.  The sun
streamed in at the little window, but she sat with her own back and
the back of the large chair towards it, screening the fire as if
she were sedulously keeping IT warm, instead of it keeping her
warm, and watching it in a most distrustful manner.  The completion
of the preparations for my breakfast, by relieving the fire, gave
her such extreme joy that she laughed aloud - and a very
unmelodious laugh she had, I must say.

I sat down to my brown loaf, my egg, and my rasher of bacon, with
a basin of milk besides, and made a most delicious meal.  While I
was yet in the full enjoyment of it, the old woman of the house
said to the Master:

'Have you got your flute with you?'

'Yes,' he returned.

'Have a blow at it,' said the old woman, coaxingly.  'Do!'

The Master, upon this, put his hand underneath the skirts of his
coat, and brought out his flute in three pieces, which he screwed
together, and began immediately to play.  My impression is, after
many years of consideration, that there never can have been anybody
in the world who played worse.  He made the most dismal sounds I
have ever heard produced by any means, natural or artificial.  I
don't know what the tunes were - if there were such things in the
performance at all, which I doubt - but the influence of the strain
upon me was, first, to make me think of all my sorrows until I
could hardly keep my tears back; then to take away my appetite; and
lastly, to make me so sleepy that I couldn't keep my eyes open. 
They begin to close again, and I begin to nod, as the recollection
rises fresh upon me.  Once more the little room, with its open
corner cupboard, and its square-backed chairs, and its angular
little staircase leading to the room above, and its three peacock's
feathers displayed over the mantelpiece - I remember wondering when
I first went in, what that peacock would have thought if he had
known what his finery was doomed to come to - fades from before me,
and I nod, and sleep.  The flute becomes inaudible, the wheels of
the coach are heard instead, and I am on my journey.  The coach
jolts, I wake with a start, and the flute has come back again, and
the Master at Salem House is sitting with his legs crossed, playing
it dolefully, while the old woman of the house looks on delighted. 
She fades in her turn, and he fades, and all fades, and there is no
flute, no Master, no Salem House, no David Copperfield, no anything
but heavy sleep.

I dreamed, I thought, that once while he was blowing into this
dismal flute, the old woman of the house, who had gone nearer and
nearer to him in her ecstatic admiration, leaned over the back of
his chair and gave him an affectionate squeeze round the neck,
which stopped his playing for a moment.  I was in the middle state
between sleeping and waking, either then or immediately afterwards;
for, as he resumed - it was a real fact that he had stopped playing
- I saw and heard the same old woman ask Mrs. Fibbitson if it
wasn't delicious (meaning the flute), to which Mrs. Fibbitson
replied, 'Ay, ay! yes!' and nodded at the fire: to which, I am
persuaded, she gave the credit of the whole performance.

When I seemed to have been dozing a long while, the Master at Salem
House unscrewed his flute into the three pieces, put them up as
before, and took me away.  We found the coach very near at hand,
and got upon the roof; but I was so dead sleepy, that when we
stopped on the road to take up somebody else, they put me inside
where there were no passengers, and where I slept profoundly, until
I found the coach going at a footpace up a steep hill among green
leaves.  Presently, it stopped, and had come to its destination.

A short walk brought us - I mean the Master and me - to Salem
House, which was enclosed with a high brick wall, and looked very
dull.  Over a door in this wall was a board with SALEM HousE upon
it; and through a grating in this door we were surveyed when we
rang the bell by a surly face, which I found, on the door being
opened, belonged to a stout man with a bull-neck, a wooden leg,
overhanging temples, and his hair cut close all round his head.

'The new boy,' said the Master.

The man with the wooden leg eyed me all over - it didn't take long,
for there was not much of me - and locked the gate behind us, and
took out the key.  We were going up to the house, among some dark
heavy trees, when he called after my conductor.
'Hallo!'

We looked back, and he was standing at the door of a little lodge,
where he lived, with a pair of boots in his hand.

'Here!  The cobbler's been,' he said, 'since you've been out, Mr.
Mell, and he says he can't mend 'em any more.  He says there ain't
a bit of the original boot left, and he wonders you expect it.'

With these words he threw the boots towards Mr. Mell, who went back
a few paces to pick them up, and looked at them (very
disconsolately, I was afraid), as we went on together.  I observed
then, for the first time, that the boots he had on were a good deal
the worse for wear, and that his stocking was just breaking out in
one place, like a bud.

Salem House was a square brick building with wings; of a bare and
unfurnished appearance.  All about it was so very quiet, that I
said to Mr. Mell I supposed the boys were out; but he seemed
surprised at my not knowing that it was holiday-time.  That all the
boys were at their several homes.  That Mr. Creakle, the
proprietor, was down by the sea-side with Mrs. and Miss Creakle;
and that I was sent in holiday-time as a punishment for my
misdoing, all of which he explained to me as we went along.

I gazed upon the schoolroom into which he took me, as the most
forlorn and desolate place I had ever seen.  I see it now.  A long
room with three long rows of desks, and six of forms, and bristling
all round with pegs for hats and slates.  Scraps of old copy-books
and exercises litter the dirty floor.  Some silkworms' houses, made
of the same materials, are scattered over the desks.  Two miserable
little white mice, left behind by their owner, are running up and
down in a fusty castle made of pasteboard and wire, looking in all
the corners with their red eyes for anything to eat.  A bird, in a
cage very little bigger than himself, makes a mournful rattle now
and then in hopping on his perch, two inches high, or dropping from
it; but neither sings nor chirps.  There is a strange unwholesome
smell upon the room, like mildewed corduroys, sweet apples wanting
air, and rotten books.  There could not well be more ink splashed
about it, if it had been roofless from its first construction, and
the skies had rained, snowed, hailed, and blown ink through the
varying seasons of the year.

Mr. Mell having left me while he took his irreparable boots
upstairs, I went softly to the upper end of the room, observing all
this as I crept along.  Suddenly I came upon a pasteboard placard,
beautifully written, which was lying on the desk, and bore these
words: 'TAKE CARE OF HIM.  HE BITES.'

I got upon the desk immediately, apprehensive of at least a great
dog underneath.  But, though I looked all round with anxious eyes,
I could see nothing of him.  I was still engaged in peering about,
when Mr. Mell came back, and asked me what I did up there?

'I beg your pardon, sir,' says I, 'if you please, I'm looking for
the dog.'

'Dog?' he says.  'What dog?'

'Isn't it a dog, sir?'

'Isn't what a dog?'

'That's to be taken care of, sir; that bites.'

'No, Copperfield,' says he, gravely, 'that's not a dog.  That's a
boy.  My instructions are, Copperfield, to put this placard on your
back.  I am sorry to make such a beginning with you, but I must do
it.'  With that he took me down, and tied the placard, which was
neatly constructed for the purpose, on my shoulders like a
knapsack; and wherever I went, afterwards, I had the consolation of
carrying it.

What I suffered from that placard, nobody can imagine.  Whether it
was possible for people to see me or not, I always fancied that
somebody was reading it.  It was no relief to turn round and find
nobody; for wherever my back was, there I imagined somebody always
to be.  That cruel man with the wooden leg aggravated my
sufferings.  He was in authority; and if he ever saw me leaning
against a tree, or a wall, or the house, he roared out from his
lodge door in a stupendous voice, 'Hallo, you sir!  You
Copperfield!  Show that badge conspicuous, or I'll report you!' 
The playground was a bare gravelled yard, open to all the back of
the house and the offices; and I knew that the servants read it,
and the butcher read it, and the baker read it; that everybody, in
a word, who came backwards and forwards to the house, of a morning
when I was ordered to walk there, read that I was to be taken care
of, for I bit, I recollect that I positively began to have a dread
of myself, as a kind of wild boy who did bite.

There was an old door in this playground, on which the boys had a
custom of carving their names.  It was completely covered with such
inscriptions.  In my dread of the end of the vacation and their
coming back, I could not read a boy's name, without inquiring in
what tone and with what emphasis HE would read, 'Take care of him. 
He bites.'  There was one boy - a certain J. Steerforth - who cut
his name very deep and very often, who, I conceived, would read it
in a rather strong voice, and afterwards pull my hair.  There was
another boy, one Tommy Traddles, who I dreaded would make game of
it, and pretend to be dreadfully frightened of me.  There was a
third, George Demple, who I fancied would sing it.  I have looked,
a little shrinking creature, at that door, until the owners of all
the names - there were five-and-forty of them in the school then,
Mr. Mell said - seemed to send me to Coventry by general
acclamation, and to cry out, each in his own way, 'Take care of
him.  He bites!'

It was the same with the places at the desks and forms.  It was the
same with the groves of deserted bedsteads I peeped at, on my way
to, and when I was in, my own bed.  I remember dreaming night after
night, of being with my mother as she used to be, or of going to a
party at Mr. Peggotty's, or of travelling outside the stage-coach,
or of dining again with my unfortunate friend the waiter, and in
all these circumstances making people scream and stare, by the
unhappy disclosure that I had nothing on but my little night-shirt,
and that placard.

In the monotony of my life, and in my constant apprehension of the
re-opening of the school, it was such an insupportable affliction!
I had long tasks every day to do with Mr. Mell; but I did them,
there being no Mr. and Miss Murdstone here, and got through them
without disgrace.  Before, and after them, I walked about -
supervised, as I have mentioned, by the man with the wooden leg. 
How vividly I call to mind the damp about the house, the green
cracked flagstones in the court, an old leaky water-butt, and the
discoloured trunks of some of the grim trees, which seemed to have
dripped more in the rain than other trees, and to have blown less
in the sun!  At one we dined, Mr. Mell and I, at the upper end of
a long bare dining-room, full of deal tables, and smelling of fat. 
Then, we had more tasks until tea, which Mr. Mell drank out of a
blue teacup, and I out of a tin pot.  All day long, and until seven
or eight in the evening, Mr. Mell, at his own detached desk in the
schoolroom, worked hard with pen, ink, ruler, books, and writing-
paper, making out the bills (as I found) for last half-year.  When
he had put up his things for the night he took out his flute, and
blew at it, until I almost thought he would gradually blow his
whole being into the large hole at the top, and ooze away at the
keys.

I picture my small self in the dimly-lighted rooms, sitting with my
head upon my hand, listening to the doleful performance of Mr.
Mell, and conning tomorrow's lessons.  I picture myself with my
books shut up, still listening to the doleful performance of Mr.
Mell, and listening through it to what used to be at home, and to
the blowing of the wind on Yarmouth flats, and feeling very sad and
solitary.  I picture myself going up to bed, among the unused
rooms, and sitting on my bed-side crying for a comfortable word
from Peggotty.  I picture myself coming downstairs in the morning,
and looking through a long ghastly gash of a staircase window at
the school-bell hanging on the top of an out-house with a
weathercock above it; and dreading the time when it shall ring J.
Steerforth and the rest to work: which is only second, in my
foreboding apprehensions, to the time when the man with the wooden
leg shall unlock the rusty gate to give admission to the awful Mr.
Creakle.  I cannot think I was a very dangerous character in any of
these aspects, but in all of them I carried the same warning on my
back.

Mr. Mell never said much to me, but he was never harsh to me.  I
suppose we were company to each other, without talking.  I forgot
to mention that he would talk to himself sometimes, and grin, and
clench his fist, and grind his teeth, and pull his hair in an
unaccountable manner.  But he had these peculiarities: and at first
they frightened me, though I soon got used to them.

CHAPTER 6
I ENLARGE MY CIRCLE OF ACQUAINTANCE

I HAD led this life about a month, when the man with the wooden leg
began to stump about with a mop and a bucket of water, from which
I inferred that preparations were making to receive Mr. Creakle and
the boys.  I was not mistaken; for the mop came into the schoolroom
before long, and turned out Mr. Mell and me, who lived where we
could, and got on how we could, for some days, during which we were
always in the way of two or three young women, who had rarely shown
themselves before, and were so continually in the midst of dust
that I sneezed almost as much as if Salem House had been a great
snuff-box.

One day I was informed by Mr. Mell that Mr. Creakle would be home
that evening.  In the evening, after tea, I heard that he was come. 
Before bedtime, I was fetched by the man with the wooden leg to
appear before him.

Mr. Creakle's part of the house was a good deal more comfortable
than ours, and he had a snug bit of garden that looked pleasant
after the dusty playground, which was such a desert in miniature,
that I thought no one but a camel, or a dromedary, could have felt
at home in it.  It seemed to me a bold thing even to take notice
that the passage looked comfortable, as I went on my way,
trembling, to Mr. Creakle's presence: which so abashed me, when I
was ushered into it, that I hardly saw Mrs. Creakle or Miss Creakle
(who were both there, in the parlour), or anything but Mr. Creakle,
a stout gentleman with a bunch of watch-chain and seals, in an
arm-chair, with a tumbler and bottle beside him.

'So!' said Mr. Creakle.  'This is the young gentleman whose teeth
are to be filed!  Turn him round.'

The wooden-legged man turned me about so as to exhibit the placard;
and having afforded time for a full survey of it, turned me about
again, with my face to Mr. Creakle, and posted himself at Mr.
Creakle's side.  Mr. Creakle's face was fiery, and his eyes were
small, and deep in his head; he had thick veins in his forehead, a
little nose, and a large chin.  He was bald on the top of his head;
and had some thin wet-looking hair that was just turning grey,
brushed across each temple, so that the two sides interlaced on his
forehead.  But the circumstance about him which impressed me most,
was, that he had no voice, but spoke in a whisper.  The exertion
this cost him, or the consciousness of talking in that feeble way,
made his angry face so much more angry, and his thick veins so much
thicker, when he spoke, that I am not surprised, on looking back,
at this peculiarity striking me as his chief one.
'Now,' said Mr. Creakle.  'What's the report of this boy?'

'There's nothing against him yet,' returned the man with the wooden
leg.  'There has been no opportunity.'

I thought Mr. Creakle was disappointed.  I thought Mrs. and Miss
Creakle (at whom I now glanced for the first time, and who were,
both, thin and quiet) were not disappointed.

'Come here, sir!' said Mr. Creakle, beckoning to me.

'Come here!' said the man with the wooden leg, repeating the
gesture.

'I have the happiness of knowing your father-in-law,' whispered Mr.
Creakle, taking me by the ear; 'and a worthy man he is, and a man
of a strong character.  He knows me, and I know him.  Do YOU know
me?  Hey?' said Mr. Creakle, pinching my ear with ferocious
playfulness.

'Not yet, sir,' I said, flinching with the pain.

'Not yet?  Hey?' repeated Mr. Creakle.  'But you will soon.  Hey?'

'You will soon.  Hey?' repeated the man with the wooden leg.  I
afterwards found that he generally acted, with his strong voice, as
Mr. Creakle's interpreter to the boys.

I was very much frightened, and said, I hoped so, if he pleased. 
I felt, all this while, as if my ear were blazing; he pinched it so
hard.

'I'll tell you what I am,' whispered Mr. Creakle, letting it go at
last, with a screw at parting that brought the water into my eyes. 
'I'm a Tartar.'

'A Tartar,' said the man with the wooden leg.

'When I say I'll do a thing, I do it,' said Mr. Creakle; 'and when
I say I will have a thing done, I will have it done.'

'- Will have a thing done, I will have it done,' repeated the man
with the wooden leg.

'I am a determined character,' said Mr. Creakle.  'That's what I
am.  I do my duty.  That's what I do.  My flesh and blood' - he
looked at Mrs. Creakle as he said this - 'when it rises against me,
is not my flesh and blood.  I discard it.  Has that fellow' - to
the man with the wooden leg -'been here again?'

'No,' was the answer.

'No,' said Mr. Creakle.  'He knows better.  He knows me.  Let him
keep away.  I say let him keep away,' said Mr. Creakle, striking
his hand upon the table, and looking at Mrs. Creakle, 'for he knows
me.  Now you have begun to know me too, my young friend, and you
may go.  Take him away.'

I was very glad to be ordered away, for Mrs. and Miss Creakle were
both wiping their eyes, and I felt as uncomfortable for them as I
did for myself.  But I had a petition on my mind which concerned me
so nearly, that I couldn't help saying, though I wondered at my own
courage:

'If you please, sir -'

Mr. Creakle whispered, 'Hah!  What's this?' and bent his eyes upon
me, as if he would have burnt me up with them.

'If you please, sir,' I faltered, 'if I might be allowed (I am very
sorry indeed, sir, for what I did) to take this writing off, before
the boys come back -'

Whether Mr. Creakle was in earnest, or whether he only did it to
frighten me, I don't know, but he made a burst out of his chair,
before which I precipitately retreated, without waiting for the
escort Of the man with the wooden leg, and never once stopped until
I reached my own bedroom, where, finding I was not pursued, I went
to bed, as it was time, and lay quaking, for a couple of hours.

Next morning Mr. Sharp came back.  Mr. Sharp was the first master,
and superior to Mr. Mell.  Mr. Mell took his meals with the boys,
but Mr. Sharp dined and supped at Mr. Creakle's table.  He was a
limp, delicate-looking gentleman, I thought, with a good deal of
nose, and a way of carrying his head on one side, as if it were a
little too heavy for him.  His hair was very smooth and wavy; but
I was informed by the very first boy who came back that it was a
wig (a second-hand one HE said), and that Mr. Sharp went out every
Saturday afternoon to get it curled.

It was no other than Tommy Traddles who gave me this piece of
intelligence.  He was the first boy who returned.  He introduced
himself by informing me that I should find his name on the right-
hand corner of the gate, over the top-bolt; upon that I said,
'Traddles?' to which he replied, 'The same,' and then he asked me
for a full account of myself and family.

It was a happy circumstance for me that Traddles came back first. 
He enjoyed my placard so much, that he saved me from the
embarrassment of either disclosure or concealment, by presenting me
to every other boy who came back, great or small, immediately on
his arrival, in this form of introduction, 'Look here!  Here's a
game!'  Happily, too, the greater part of the boys came back
low-spirited, and were not so boisterous at my expense as I had
expected.  Some of them certainly did dance about me like wild
Indians, and the greater part could not resist the temptation of
pretending that I was a dog, and patting and soothing me, lest I
should bite, and saying, 'Lie down, sir!' and calling me Towzer. 
This was naturally confusing, among so many strangers, and cost me
some tears, but on the whole it was much better than I had
anticipated.

I was not considered as being formally received into the school,
however, until J. Steerforth arrived.  Before this boy, who was
reputed to be a great scholar, and was very good-looking, and at
least half-a-dozen years my senior, I was carried as before a
magistrate.  He inquired, under a shed in the playground, into the
particulars of my punishment, and was pleased to express his
opinion that it was 'a jolly shame'; for which I became bound to
him ever afterwards.

'What money have you got, Copperfield?' he said, walking aside with
me when he had disposed of my affair in these terms.  I told him
seven shillings.

'You had better give it to me to take care of,' he said.  'At
least, you can if you like.  You needn't if you don't like.'

I hastened to comply with his friendly suggestion, and opening
Peggotty's purse, turned it upside down into his hand.

'Do you want to spend anything now?' he asked me.

'No thank you,' I replied.

'You can, if you like, you know,' said Steerforth.  'Say the word.'

'No, thank you, sir,' I repeated.

'Perhaps you'd like to spend a couple of shillings or so, in a
bottle of currant wine by and by, up in the bedroom?' said
Steerforth.  'You belong to my bedroom, I find.'

It certainly had not occurred to me before, but I said, Yes, I
should like that.

'Very good,' said Steerforth.  'You'll be glad to spend another
shilling or so, in almond cakes, I dare say?'

I said, Yes, I should like that, too.

'And another shilling or so in biscuits, and another in fruit, eh?'
said Steerforth.  'I say, young Copperfield, you're going it!'

I smiled because he smiled, but I was a little troubled in my mind,
too.

'Well!' said Steerforth.  'We must make it stretch as far as we
can; that's all.  I'll do the best in my power for you.  I can go
out when I like, and I'll smuggle the prog in.'  With these words
he put the money in his pocket, and kindly told me not to make
myself uneasy; he would take care it should be all right.
He was as good as his word, if that were all right which I had a
secret misgiving was nearly all wrong - for I feared it was a waste
of my mother's two half-crowns - though I had preserved the piece
of paper they were wrapped in: which was a precious saving.  When
we went upstairs to bed, he produced the whole seven
shillings'worth, and laid it out on my bed in the moonlight,
saying:

'There you are, young Copperfield, and a royal spread you've got.'

I couldn't think of doing the honours of the feast, at my time of
life, while he was by; my hand shook at the very thought of it.  I
begged him to do me the favour of presiding; and my request being
seconded by the other boys who were in that room, he acceded to it,
and sat upon my pillow, handing round the viands - with perfect
fairness, I must say - and dispensing the currant wine in a little
glass without a foot, which was his own property.  As to me, I sat
on his left hand, and the rest were grouped about us, on the
nearest beds and on the floor.

How well I recollect our sitting there, talking in whispers; or
their talking, and my respectfully listening, I ought rather to
say; the moonlight falling a little way into the room, through the
window, painting a pale window on the floor, and the greater part
of us in shadow, except when Steerforth dipped a match into a
phosphorus-box, when he wanted to look for anything on the board,
and shed a blue glare over us that was gone directly!  A certain
mysterious feeling, consequent on the darkness, the secrecy of the
revel, and the whisper in which everything was said, steals over me
again, and I listen to all they tell me with a vague feeling of
solemnity and awe, which makes me glad that they are all so near,
and frightens me (though I feign to laugh) when Traddles pretends
to see a ghost in the corner.

I heard all kinds of things about the school and all belonging to
it.  I heard that Mr. Creakle had not preferred his claim to being
a Tartar without reason; that he was the sternest and most severe
of masters; that he laid about him, right and left, every day of
his life, charging in among the boys like a trooper, and slashing
away, unmercifully.  That he knew nothing himself, but the art of
slashing, being more ignorant (J. Steerforth said) than the lowest
boy in the school; that he had been, a good many years ago, a small
hop-dealer in the Borough, and had taken to the schooling business
after being bankrupt in hops, and making away with Mrs. Creakle's
money.  With a good deal more of that sort, which I wondered how
they knew.

I heard that the man with the wooden leg, whose name was Tungay,
was an obstinate barbarian who had formerly assisted in the hop
business, but had come into the scholastic line with Mr. Creakle,
in consequence, as was supposed among the boys, of his having
broken his leg in Mr. Creakle's service, and having done a deal of
dishonest work for him, and knowing his secrets.  I heard that with
the single exception of Mr. Creakle, Tungay considered the whole
establishment, masters and boys, as his natural enemies, and that
the only delight of his life was to be sour and malicious.  I heard
that Mr. Creakle had a son, who had not been Tungay's friend, and
who, assisting in the school, had once held some remonstrance with
his father on an occasion when its discipline was very cruelly
exercised, and was supposed, besides, to have protested against his
father's usage of his mother.  I heard that Mr. Creakle had turned
him out of doors, in consequence; and that Mrs. and Miss Creakle
had been in a sad way, ever since.

But the greatest wonder that I heard of Mr. Creakle was, there
being one boy in the school on whom he never ventured to lay a
hand, and that boy being J. Steerforth.  Steerforth himself
confirmed this when it was stated, and said that he should like to
begin to see him do it.  On being asked by a mild boy (not me) how
he would proceed if he did begin to see him do it, he dipped a
match into his phosphorus-box on purpose to shed a glare over his
reply, and said he would commence by knocking him down with a blow
on the forehead from the seven-and-sixpenny ink-bottle that was
always on the mantelpiece.  We sat in the dark for some time,
breathless.

I heard that Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell were both supposed to be
wretchedly paid; and that when there was hot and cold meat for
dinner at Mr. Creakle's table, Mr. Sharp was always expected to say
he preferred cold; which was again corroborated by J. Steerforth,
the only parlour-boarder.  I heard that Mr. Sharp's wig didn't fit
him; and that he needn't be so 'bounceable' - somebody else said
'bumptious' - about it, because his own red hair was very plainly
to be seen behind.

I heard that one boy, who was a coal-merchant's son, came as a
set-off against the coal-bill, and was called, on that account,
'Exchange or Barter' - a name selected from the arithmetic book as
expressing this arrangement.  I heard that the table beer was a
robbery of parents, and the pudding an imposition.  I heard that
Miss Creakle was regarded by the school in general as being in love
with Steerforth; and I am sure, as I sat in the dark, thinking of
his nice voice, and his fine face, and his easy manner, and his
curling hair, I thought it very likely.  I heard that Mr. Mell was
not a bad sort of fellow, but hadn't a sixpence to bless himself
with; and that there was no doubt that old Mrs. Mell, his mother,
was as poor as job.  I thought of my breakfast then, and what had
sounded like 'My Charley!' but I was, I am glad to remember, as
mute as a mouse about it.

The hearing of all this, and a good deal more, outlasted the
banquet some time.  The greater part of the guests had gone to bed
as soon as the eating and drinking were over; and we, who had
remained whispering and listening half-undressed, at last betook
ourselves to bed, too.

'Good night, young Copperfield,' said Steerforth.  'I'll take care
of you.'
'You're very kind,' I gratefully returned.  'I am very much obliged
to you.'

'You haven't got a sister, have you?' said Steerforth, yawning.

'No,' I answered.

'That's a pity,' said Steerforth.  'If you had had one, I should
think she would have been a pretty, timid, little, bright-eyed sort
of girl.  I should have liked to know her.  Good night, young
Copperfield.'

'Good night, sir,' I replied.

I thought of him very much after I went to bed, and raised myself,
I recollect, to look at him where he lay in the moonlight, with his
handsome face turned up, and his head reclining easily on his arm. 
He was a person of great power in my eyes; that was, of course, the
reason of my mind running on him.  No veiled future dimly glanced
upon him in the moonbeams.  There was no shadowy picture of his
footsteps, in the garden that I dreamed of walking in all night.

CHAPTER 7
MY 'FIRST HALF' AT SALEM HOUSE

School began in earnest next day.  A profound impression was made
upon me, I remember, by the roar of voices in the schoolroom
suddenly becoming hushed as death when Mr. Creakle entered after
breakfast, and stood in the doorway looking round upon us like a
giant in a story-book surveying his captives.

Tungay stood at Mr. Creakle's elbow.  He had no occasion, I
thought, to cry out 'Silence!' so ferociously, for the boys were
all struck speechless and motionless.

Mr. Creakle was seen to speak, and Tungay was heard, to this
effect.

'Now, boys, this is a new half.  Take care what you're about, in
this new half.  Come fresh up to the lessons, I advise you, for I
come fresh up to the punishment.  I won't flinch.  It will be of no
use your rubbing yourselves; you won't rub the marks out that I
shall give you.  Now get to work, every boy!'

When this dreadful exordium was over, and Tungay had stumped out
again, Mr. Creakle came to where I sat, and told me that if I were
famous for biting, he was famous for biting, too.  He then showed
me the cane, and asked me what I thought of THAT, for a tooth?  Was
it a sharp tooth, hey?  Was it a double tooth, hey?  Had it a deep
prong, hey?  Did it bite, hey?  Did it bite?  At every question he
gave me a fleshy cut with it that made me writhe; so I was very
soon made free of Salem House (as Steerforth said), and was very
soon in tears also.

Not that I mean to say these were special marks of distinction,
which only I received.  On the contrary, a large majority of the
boys (especially the smaller ones) were visited with similar
instances of notice, as Mr. Creakle made the round of the
schoolroom.  Half the establishment was writhing and crying, before
the day's work began; and how much of it had writhed and cried
before the day's work was over, I am really afraid to recollect,
lest I should seem to exaggerate.

I should think there never can have been a man who enjoyed his
profession more than Mr. Creakle did.  He had a delight in cutting
at the boys, which was like the satisfaction of a craving appetite. 
I am confident that he couldn't resist a chubby boy, especially;
that there was a fascination in such a subject, which made him
restless in his mind, until he had scored and marked him for the
day.  I was chubby myself, and ought to know.  I am sure when I
think of the fellow now, my blood rises against him with the
disinterested indignation I should feel if I could have known all
about him without having ever been in his power; but it rises
hotly, because I know him to have been an incapable brute, who had
no more right to be possessed of the great trust he held, than to
be Lord High Admiral, or Commander-in-Chief - in either of which
capacities it is probable that he would have done infinitely less
mischief.

Miserable little propitiators of a remorseless Idol, how abject we
were to him!  What a launch in life I think it now, on looking
back, to be so mean and servile to a man of such parts and
pretensions!

Here I sit at the desk again, watching his eye - humbly watching
his eye, as he rules a ciphering-book for another victim whose
hands have just been flattened by that identical ruler, and who is
trying to wipe the sting out with a pocket-handkerchief.  I have
plenty to do.  I don't watch his eye in idleness, but because I am
morbidly attracted to it, in a dread desire to know what he will do
next, and whether it will be my turn to suffer, or somebody else's. 
A lane of small boys beyond me, with the same interest in his eye,
watch it too.  I think he knows it, though he pretends he don't. 
He makes dreadful mouths as he rules the ciphering-book; and now he
throws his eye sideways down our lane, and we all droop over our
books and tremble.  A moment afterwards we are again eyeing him. 
An unhappy culprit, found guilty of imperfect exercise, approaches
at his command.  The culprit falters excuses, and professes a
determination to do better tomorrow.  Mr. Creakle cuts a joke
before he beats him, and we laugh at it, - miserable little dogs,
we laugh, with our visages as white as ashes, and our hearts
sinking into our boots.

Here I sit at the desk again, on a drowsy summer afternoon.  A buzz
and hum go up around me, as if the boys were so many bluebottles. 
A cloggy sensation of the lukewarm fat of meat is upon me (we dined
an hour or two ago), and my head is as heavy as so much lead.  I
would give the world to go to sleep.  I sit with my eye on Mr.
Creakle, blinking at him like a young owl; when sleep overpowers me
for a minute, he still looms through my slumber, ruling those
ciphering-books, until he softly comes behind me and wakes me to
plainer perception of him, with a red ridge across my back.

Here I am in the playground, with my eye still fascinated by him,
though I can't see him.  The window at a little distance from which
I know he is having his dinner, stands for him, and I eye that
instead.  If he shows his face near it, mine assumes an imploring
and submissive expression.  If he looks out through the glass, the
boldest boy (Steerforth excepted) stops in the middle of a shout or
yell, and becomes contemplative.  One day, Traddles (the most
unfortunate boy in the world) breaks that window accidentally, with
a ball.  I shudder at this moment with the tremendous sensation of
seeing it done, and feeling that the ball has bounded on to Mr.
Creakle's sacred head.

Poor Traddles!  In a tight sky-blue suit that made his arms and
legs like German sausages, or roly-poly puddings, he was the
merriest and most miserable of all the boys.  He was always being
caned - I think he was caned every day that half-year, except one
holiday Monday when he was only ruler'd on both hands - and was
always going to write to his uncle about it, and never did.  After
laying his head on the desk for a little while, he would cheer up,
somehow, begin to laugh again, and draw skeletons all over his
slate, before his eyes were dry.  I used at first to wonder what
comfort Traddles found in drawing skeletons; and for some time
looked upon him as a sort of hermit, who reminded himself by those
symbols of mortality that caning couldn't last for ever.  But I
believe he only did it because they were easy, and didn't want any
features.

He was very honourable, Traddles was, and held it as a solemn duty
in the boys to stand by one another.  He suffered for this on
several occasions; and particularly once, when Steerforth laughed
in church, and the Beadle thought it was Traddles, and took him
out.  I see him now, going away in custody, despised by the
congregation.  He never said who was the real offender, though he
smarted for it next day, and was imprisoned so many hours that he
came forth with a whole churchyard-full of skeletons swarming all
over his Latin Dictionary.  But he had his reward.  Steerforth said
there was nothing of the sneak in Traddles, and we all felt that to
be the highest praise.  For my part, I could have gone through a
good deal (though I was much less brave than Traddles, and nothing
like so old) to have won such a recompense.

To see Steerforth walk to church before us, arm-in-arm with Miss
Creakle, was one of the great sights of my life.  I didn't think
Miss Creakle equal to little Em'ly in point of beauty, and I didn't
love her (I didn't dare); but I thought her a young lady of
extraordinary attractions, and in point of gentility not to be
surpassed.  When Steerforth, in white trousers, carried her parasol
for her, I felt proud to know him; and believed that she could not
choose but adore him with all her heart.  Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell
were both notable personages in my eyes; but Steerforth was to them
what the sun was to two stars.

Steerforth continued his protection of me, and proved a very useful
friend; since nobody dared to annoy one whom he honoured with his
countenance.  He couldn't - or at all events he didn't - defend me
from Mr. Creakle, who was very severe with me; but whenever I had
been treated worse than usual, he always told me that I wanted a
little of his pluck, and that he wouldn't have stood it himself;
which I felt he intended for encouragement, and considered to be
very kind of him.  There was one advantage, and only one that I
know of, in Mr. Creakle's severity.  He found my placard in his way
when he came up or down behind the form on which I sat, and wanted
to make a cut at me in passing; for this reason it was soon taken
off, and I saw it no more.

An accidental circumstance cemented the intimacy between Steerforth
and me, in a manner that inspired me with great pride and
satisfaction, though it sometimes led to inconvenience.  It
happened on one occasion, when he was doing me the honour of
talking to me in the playground, that I hazarded the observation
that something or somebody - I forget what now - was like something
or somebody in Peregrine Pickle.  He said nothing at the time; but
when I was going to bed at night, asked me if I had got that book?

I told him no, and explained how it was that I had read it, and all
those other books of which I have made mention.

'And do you recollect them?' Steerforth said.

'Oh yes,' I replied; I had a good memory, and I believed I
recollected them very well.

'Then I tell you what, young Copperfield,' said Steerforth, 'you
shall tell 'em to me.  I can't get to sleep very early at night,
and I generally wake rather early in the morning.  We'll go over
'em one after another.  We'll make some regular Arabian Nights of
it.'

I felt extremely flattered by this arrangement, and we commenced
carrying it into execution that very evening.  What ravages I
committed on my favourite authors in the course of my
interpretation of them, I am not in a condition to say, and should
be very unwilling to know; but I had a profound faith in them, and
I had, to the best of my belief, a simple, earnest manner of
narrating what I did narrate; and these qualities went a long way.

The drawback was, that I was often sleepy at night, or out of
spirits and indisposed to resume the story; and then it was rather
hard work, and it must be done; for to disappoint or to displease
Steerforth was of course out of the question.  In the morning, too,
when I felt weary, and should have enjoyed another hour's repose
very much, it was a tiresome thing to be roused, like the Sultana
Scheherazade, and forced into a long story before the getting-up
bell rang; but Steerforth was resolute; and as he explained to me,
in return, my sums and exercises, and anything in my tasks that was
too hard for me, I was no loser by the transaction.  Let me do
myself justice, however.  I was moved by no interested or selfish
motive, nor was I moved by fear of him.  I admired and loved him,
and his approval was return enough.  It was so precious to me that
I look back on these trifles, now, with an aching heart.

Steerforth was considerate, too; and showed his consideration, in
one particular instance, in an unflinching manner that was a little
tantalizing, I suspect, to poor Traddles and the rest.  Peggotty's
promised letter - what a comfortable letter it was! - arrived
before 'the half' was many weeks old; and with it a cake in a
perfect nest of oranges, and two bottles of cowslip wine.  This
treasure, as in duty bound, I laid at the feet of Steerforth, and
begged him to dispense.

'Now, I'll tell you what, young Copperfield,' said he: 'the wine
shall be kept to wet your whistle when you are story-telling.'

I blushed at the idea, and begged him, in my modesty, not to think
of it.  But he said he had observed I was sometimes hoarse - a
little roopy was his exact expression - and it should be, every
drop, devoted to the purpose he had mentioned.  Accordingly, it was
locked up in his box, and drawn off by himself in a phial, and
administered to me through a piece of quill in the cork, when I was
supposed to be in want of a restorative.  Sometimes, to make it a
more sovereign specific, he was so kind as to squeeze orange juice
into it, or to stir it up with ginger, or dissolve a peppermint
drop in it; and although I cannot assert that the flavour was
improved by these experiments, or that it was exactly the compound
one would have chosen for a stomachic, the last thing at night and
the first thing in the morning, I drank it gratefully and was very
sensible of his attention.

We seem, to me, to have been months over Peregrine, and months more
over the other stories.  The institution never flagged for want of
a story, I am certain; and the wine lasted out almost as well as
the matter.  Poor Traddles - I never think of that boy but with a
strange disposition to laugh, and with tears in my eyes - was a
sort of chorus, in general; and affected to be convulsed with mirth
at the comic parts, and to be overcome with fear when there was any
passage of an alarming character in the narrative.  This rather put
me out, very often.  It was a great jest of his, I recollect, to
pretend that he couldn't keep his teeth from chattering, whenever
mention was made of an Alguazill in connexion with the adventures
of Gil Blas; and I remember that when Gil Blas met the captain of
the robbers in Madrid, this unlucky joker counterfeited such an
ague of terror, that he was overheard by Mr. Creakle, who was
prowling about the passage, and handsomely flogged for disorderly
conduct in the bedroom.
Whatever I had within me that was romantic and dreamy, was
encouraged by so much story-telling in the dark; and in that
respect the pursuit may not have been very profitable to me.  But
the being cherished as a kind of plaything in my room, and the
consciousness that this accomplishment of mine was bruited about
among the boys, and attracted a good deal of notice to me though I
was the youngest there, stimulated me to exertion.  In a school
carried on by sheer cruelty, whether it is presided over by a dunce
or not, there is not likely to be much learnt.  I believe our boys
were, generally, as ignorant a set as any schoolboys in existence;
they were too much troubled and knocked about to learn; they could
no more do that to advantage, than any one can do anything to
advantage in a life of constant misfortune, torment, and worry. 
But my little vanity, and Steerforth's help, urged me on somehow;
and without saving me from much, if anything, in the way of
punishment, made me, for the time I was there, an exception to the
general body, insomuch that I did steadily pick up some crumbs of
knowledge.

In this I was much assisted by Mr. Mell, who had a liking for me
that I am grateful to remember.  It always gave me pain to observe
that Steerforth treated him with systematic disparagement, and
seldom lost an occasion of wounding his feelings, or inducing
others to do so.  This troubled me the more for a long time,
because I had soon told Steerforth, from whom I could no more keep
such a secret, than I could keep a cake or any other tangible
possession, about the two old women Mr. Mell had taken me to see;
and I was always afraid that Steerforth would let it out, and twit
him with it.

We little thought, any one of us, I dare say, when I ate my
breakfast that first morning, and went to sleep under the shadow of
the peacock's feathers to the sound of the flute, what consequences
would come of the introduction into those alms-houses of my
insignificant person.  But the visit had its unforeseen
consequences; and of a serious sort, too, in their way.

One day when Mr. Creakle kept the house from indisposition, which
naturally diffused a lively joy through the school, there was a
good deal of noise in the course of the morning's work.  The great
relief and satisfaction experienced by the boys made them difficult
to manage; and though the dreaded Tungay brought his wooden leg in
twice or thrice, and took notes of the principal offenders' names,
no great impression was made by it, as they were pretty sure of
getting into trouble tomorrow, do what they would, and thought it
wise, no doubt, to enjoy themselves today.

It was, properly, a half-holiday; being Saturday.  But as the noise
in the playground would have disturbed Mr. Creakle, and the weather
was not favourable for going out walking, we were ordered into
school in the afternoon, and set some lighter tasks than usual,
which were made for the occasion.  It was the day of the week on
which Mr. Sharp went out to get his wig curled; so Mr. Mell, who
always did the drudgery, whatever it was, kept school by himself.
If I could associate the idea of a bull or a bear with anyone so
mild as Mr. Mell, I should think of him, in connexion with that
afternoon when the uproar was at its height, as of one of those
animals, baited by a thousand dogs.  I recall him bending his
aching head, supported on his bony hand, over the book on his desk,
and wretchedly endeavouring to get on with his tiresome work,
amidst an uproar that might have made the Speaker of the House of
Commons giddy.  Boys started in and out of their places, playing at
puss in the corner with other boys; there were laughing boys,
singing boys, talking boys, dancing boys, howling boys; boys
shuffled with their feet, boys whirled about him, grinning, making
faces, mimicking him behind his back and before his eyes; mimicking
his poverty, his boots, his coat, his mother, everything belonging
to him that they should have had consideration for.

'Silence!' cried Mr. Mell, suddenly rising up, and striking his
desk with the book.  'What does this mean!  It's impossible to bear
it.  It's maddening.  How can you do it to me, boys?'

It was my book that he struck his desk with; and as I stood beside
him, following his eye as it glanced round the room, I saw the boys
all stop, some suddenly surprised, some half afraid, and some sorry
perhaps.

Steerforth's place was at the bottom of the school, at the opposite
end of the long room.  He was lounging with his back against the
wall, and his hands in his pockets, and looked at Mr. Mell with his
mouth shut up as if he were whistling, when Mr. Mell looked at him.

'Silence, Mr. Steerforth!' said Mr. Mell.

'Silence yourself,' said Steerforth, turning red.  'Whom are you
talking to?'

'Sit down,' said Mr. Mell.

'Sit down yourself,' said Steerforth, 'and mind your business.'

There was a titter, and some applause; but Mr. Mell was so white,
that silence immediately succeeded; and one boy, who had darted out
behind him to imitate his mother again, changed his mind, and
pretended to want a pen mended.

'If you think, Steerforth,' said Mr. Mell, 'that I am not
acquainted with the power you can establish over any mind here' -
he laid his hand, without considering what he did (as I supposed),
upon my head - 'or that I have not observed you, within a few
minutes, urging your juniors on to every sort of outrage against
me, you are mistaken.'

'I don't give myself the trouble of thinking at all about you,'
said Steerforth, coolly; 'so I'm not mistaken, as it happens.'

'And when you make use of your position of favouritism here, sir,'
pursued Mr. Mell, with his lip trembling very much, 'to insult a
gentleman -'

'A what? - where is he?' said Steerforth.

Here somebody cried out, 'Shame, J. Steerforth!  Too bad!'  It was
Traddles; whom Mr. Mell instantly discomfited by bidding him hold
his tongue.

- 'To insult one who is not fortunate in life, sir, and who never
gave you the least offence, and the many reasons for not insulting
whom you are old enough and wise enough to understand,' said Mr.
Mell, with his lips trembling more and more, 'you commit a mean and
base action.  You can sit down or stand up as you please, sir. 
Copperfield, go on.'

'Young Copperfield,' said Steerforth, coming forward up the room,
'stop a bit.  I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for all.  When you
take the liberty of calling me mean or base, or anything of that
sort, you are an impudent beggar.  You are always a beggar, you
know; but when you do that, you are an impudent beggar.'

I am not clear whether he was going to strike Mr. Mell, or Mr. Mell
was going to strike him, or there was any such intention on either
side.  I saw a rigidity come upon the whole school as if they had
been turned into stone, and found Mr. Creakle in the midst of us,
with Tungay at his side, and Mrs. and Miss Creakle looking in at
the door as if they were frightened.  Mr. Mell, with his elbows on
his desk and his face in his hands, sat, for some moments, quite
still.

'Mr. Mell,' said Mr. Creakle, shaking him by the arm; and his
whisper was so audible now, that Tungay felt it unnecessary to
repeat his words; 'you have not forgotten yourself, I hope?'

'No, sir, no,' returned the Master, showing his face, and shaking
his head, and rubbing his hands in great agitation.  'No, sir.  No. 
I have remembered myself, I - no, Mr. Creakle, I have not forgotten
myself, I - I have remembered myself, sir.  I - I - could wish you
had remembered me a little sooner, Mr. Creakle.  It - it - would
have been more kind, sir, more just, sir.  It would have saved me
something, sir.'

Mr. Creakle, looking hard at Mr. Mell, put his hand on Tungay's
shoulder, and got his feet upon the form close by, and sat upon the
desk.  After still looking hard at Mr. Mell from his throne, as he
shook his head, and rubbed his hands, and remained in the same
state of agitation, Mr. Creakle turned to Steerforth, and said:

'Now, sir, as he don't condescend to tell me, what is this?'

Steerforth evaded the question for a little while; looking in scorn
and anger on his opponent, and remaining silent.  I could not help
thinking even in that interval, I remember, what a noble fellow he
was in appearance, and how homely and plain Mr. Mell looked opposed
to him.

'What did he mean by talking about favourites, then?' said
Steerforth at length.

'Favourites?' repeated Mr. Creakle, with the veins in his forehead
swelling quickly.  'Who talked about favourites?'

'He did,' said Steerforth.

'And pray, what did you mean by that, sir?' demanded Mr. Creakle,
turning angrily on his assistant.

'I meant, Mr. Creakle,' he returned in a low voice, 'as I said;
that no pupil had a right to avail himself of his position of
favouritism to degrade me.'

'To degrade YOU?' said Mr. Creakle.  'My stars!  But give me leave
to ask you, Mr. What's-your-name'; and here Mr. Creakle folded his
arms, cane and all, upon his chest, and made such a knot of his
brows that his little eyes were hardly visible below them;
'whether, when you talk about favourites, you showed proper respect
to me?  To me, sir,' said Mr. Creakle, darting his head at him
suddenly, and drawing it back again, 'the principal of this
establishment, and your employer.'

'It was not judicious, sir, I am willing to admit,' said Mr. Mell. 
'I should not have done so, if I had been cool.'

Here Steerforth struck in.

'Then he said I was mean, and then he said I was base, and then I
called him a beggar.  If I had been cool, perhaps I shouldn't have
called him a beggar.  But I did, and I am ready to take the
consequences of it.'

Without considering, perhaps, whether there were any consequences
to be taken, I felt quite in a glow at this gallant speech.  It
made an impression on the boys too, for there was a low stir among
them, though no one spoke a word.

'I am surprised, Steerforth - although your candour does you
honour,' said Mr. Creakle, 'does you honour, certainly - I am
surprised, Steerforth, I must say, that you should attach such an
epithet to any person employed and paid in Salem House, sir.'

Steerforth gave a short laugh.

'That's not an answer, sir,' said Mr. Creakle, 'to my remark.  I
expect more than that from you, Steerforth.'

If Mr. Mell looked homely, in my eyes, before the handsome boy, it
would be quite impossible to say how homely Mr. Creakle looked.
'Let him deny it,' said Steerforth.

'Deny that he is a beggar, Steerforth?' cried Mr. Creakle.  'Why,
where does he go a-begging?'

'If he is not a beggar himself, his near relation's one,' said
Steerforth.  'It's all the same.'

He glanced at me, and Mr. Mell's hand gently patted me upon the
shoulder.  I looked up with a flush upon my face and remorse in my
heart, but Mr. Mell's eyes were fixed on Steerforth.  He continued
to pat me kindly on the shoulder, but he looked at him.

'Since you expect me, Mr. Creakle, to justify myself,' said
Steerforth, 'and to say what I mean, - what I have to say is, that
his mother lives on charity in an alms-house.'

Mr. Mell still looked at him, and still patted me kindly on the
shoulder, and said to himself, in a whisper, if I heard right:
'Yes, I thought so.'

Mr. Creakle turned to his assistant, with a severe frown and
laboured politeness:

'Now, you hear what this gentleman says, Mr. Mell.  Have the
goodness, if you please, to set him right before the assembled
school.'

'He is right, sir, without correction,' returned Mr. Mell, in the
midst of a dead silence; 'what he has said is true.'

'Be so good then as declare publicly, will you,' said Mr. Creakle,
putting his head on one side, and rolling his eyes round the
school, 'whether it ever came to my knowledge until this moment?'

'I believe not directly,' he returned.

'Why, you know not,' said Mr. Creakle.  'Don't you, man?'

'I apprehend you never supposed my worldly circumstances to be very
good,' replied the assistant.  'You know what my position is, and
always has been, here.'

'I apprehend, if you come to that,' said Mr. Creakle, with his
veins swelling again bigger than ever, 'that you've been in a wrong
position altogether, and mistook this for a charity school.  Mr.
Mell, we'll part, if you please.  The sooner the better.'

'There is no time,' answered Mr. Mell, rising, 'like the present.'

'Sir, to you!' said Mr. Creakle.

'I take my leave of you, Mr. Creakle, and all of you,' said Mr.
Mell, glancing round the room, and again patting me gently on the
shoulders.  'James Steerforth, the best wish I can leave you is
that you may come to be ashamed of what you have done today.  At
present I would prefer to see you anything rather than a friend, to
me, or to anyone in whom I feel an interest.'

Once more he laid his hand upon my shoulder; and then taking his
flute and a few books from his desk, and leaving the key in it for
his successor, he went out of the school, with his property under
his arm.  Mr. Creakle then made a speech, through Tungay, in which
he thanked Steerforth for asserting (though perhaps too warmly) the
independence and respectability of Salem House; and which he wound
up by shaking hands with Steerforth, while we gave three cheers -
I did not quite know what for, but I supposed for Steerforth, and
so joined in them ardently, though I felt miserable.  Mr. Creakle
then caned Tommy Traddles for being discovered in tears, instead of
cheers, on account of Mr. Mell's departure; and went back to his
sofa, or his bed, or wherever he had come from.

We were left to ourselves now, and looked very blank, I recollect,
on one another.  For myself, I felt so much self-reproach and
contrition for my part in what had happened, that nothing would
have enabled me to keep back my tears but the fear that Steerforth,
who often looked at me, I saw, might think it unfriendly - or, I
should rather say, considering our relative ages, and the feeling
with which I regarded him, undutiful - if I showed the emotion
which distressed me.  He was very angry with Traddles, and said he
was glad he had caught it.

Poor Traddles, who had passed the stage of lying with his head upon
the desk, and was relieving himself as usual with a burst of
skeletons, said he didn't care.  Mr. Mell was ill-used.

'Who has ill-used him, you girl?' said Steerforth.

'Why, you have,' returned Traddles.

'What have I done?' said Steerforth.

'What have you done?' retorted Traddles.  'Hurt his feelings, and
lost him his situation.'

'His feelings?' repeated Steerforth disdainfully.  'His feelings
will soon get the better of it, I'll be bound.  His feelings are
not like yours, Miss Traddles.  As to his situation - which was a
precious one, wasn't it? - do you suppose I am not going to write
home, and take care that he gets some money?  Polly?'

We thought this intention very noble in Steerforth, whose mother
was a widow, and rich, and would do almost anything, it was said,
that he asked her.  We were all extremely glad to see Traddles so
put down, and exalted Steerforth to the skies: especially when he
told us, as he condescended to do, that what he had done had been
done expressly for us, and for our cause; and that he had conferred
a great boon upon us by unselfishly doing it.
But I must say that when I was going on with a story in the dark
that night, Mr. Mell's old flute seemed more than once to sound
mournfully in my ears; and that when at last Steerforth was tired,
and I lay down in my bed, I fancied it playing so sorrowfully
somewhere, that I was quite wretched.

I soon forgot him in the contemplation of Steerforth, who, in an
easy amateur way, and without any book (he seemed to me to know
everything by heart), took some of his classes until a new master
was found.  The new master came from a grammar school; and before
he entered on his duties, dined in the parlour one day, to be
introduced to Steerforth.  Steerforth approved of him highly, and
told us he was a Brick.  Without exactly understanding what learned
distinction was meant by this, I respected him greatly for it, and
had no doubt whatever of his superior knowledge: though he never
took the pains with me - not that I was anybody - that Mr. Mell had
taken.

There was only one other event in this half-year, out of the daily
school-life, that made an impression upon me which still survives. 
It survives for many reasons.

One afternoon, when we were all harassed into a state of dire
confusion, and Mr. Creakle was laying about him dreadfully, Tungay
came in, and called out in his usual strong way: 'Visitors for
Copperfield!'

A few words were interchanged between him and Mr. Creakle, as, who
the visitors were, and what room they were to be shown into; and
then I, who had, according to custom, stood up on the announcement
being made, and felt quite faint with astonishment, was told to go
by the back stairs and get a clean frill on, before I repaired to
the dining-room.  These orders I obeyed, in such a flutter and
hurry of my young spirits as I had never known before; and when I
got to the parlour door, and the thought came into my head that it
might be my mother - I had only thought of Mr. or Miss Murdstone
until then - I drew back my hand from the lock, and stopped to have
a sob before I went in.

At first I saw nobody; but feeling a pressure against the door, I
looked round it, and there, to my amazement, were Mr. Peggotty and
Ham, ducking at me with their hats, and squeezing one another
against the wall.  I could not help laughing; but it was much more
in the pleasure of seeing them, than at the appearance they made. 
We shook hands in a very cordial way; and I laughed and laughed,
until I pulled out my pocket-handkerchief and wiped my eyes.

Mr. Peggotty (who never shut his mouth once, I remember, during the
visit) showed great concern when he saw me do this, and nudged Ham
to say something.

'Cheer up, Mas'r Davy bor'!' said Ham, in his simpering way.  'Why,
how you have growed!'

'Am I grown?' I said, drying my eyes.  I was not crying at anything
in particular that I know of; but somehow it made me cry, to see
old friends.

'Growed, Mas'r Davy bor'?  Ain't he growed!' said Ham.

'Ain't he growed!' said Mr. Peggotty.

They made me laugh again by laughing at each other, and then we all
three laughed until I was in danger of crying again.

'Do you know how mama is, Mr. Peggotty?' I said.  'And how my dear,
dear, old Peggotty is?'

'Oncommon,' said Mr. Peggotty.

'And little Em'ly, and Mrs. Gummidge?'

'On - common,' said Mr. Peggotty.

There was a silence.  Mr. Peggotty, to relieve it, took two
prodigious lobsters, and an enormous crab, and a large canvas bag
of shrimps, out of his pockets, and piled them up in Ham's arms.

'You see,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'knowing as you was partial to a
little relish with your wittles when you was along with us, we took
the liberty.  The old Mawther biled 'em, she did.  Mrs. Gummidge
biled 'em.  Yes,' said Mr. Peggotty, slowly, who I thought appeared
to stick to the subject on account of having no other subject
ready, 'Mrs. Gummidge, I do assure you, she biled 'em.'

I expressed my thanks; and Mr. Peggotty, after looking at Ham, who
stood smiling sheepishly over the shellfish, without making any
attempt to help him, said:

'We come, you see, the wind and tide making in our favour, in one
of our Yarmouth lugs to Gravesen'.  My sister she wrote to me the
name of this here place, and wrote to me as if ever I chanced to
come to Gravesen', I was to come over and inquire for Mas'r Davy
and give her dooty, humbly wishing him well and reporting of the
fam'ly as they was oncommon toe-be-sure.  Little Em'ly, you see,
she'll write to my sister when I go back, as I see you and as you
was similarly oncommon, and so we make it quite a merry-
go-rounder.'

I was obliged to consider a little before I understood what Mr.
Peggotty meant by this figure, expressive of a complete circle of
intelligence.  I then thanked him heartily; and said, with a
consciousness of reddening, that I supposed little Em'ly was
altered too, since we used to pick up shells and pebbles on the
beach?

'She's getting to be a woman, that's wot she's getting to be,' said
Mr. Peggotty.  'Ask HIM.'
He meant Ham, who beamed with delight and assent over the bag of
shrimps.

'Her pretty face!' said Mr. Peggotty, with his own shining like a
light.

'Her learning!' said Ham.

'Her writing!' said Mr. Peggotty.  'Why it's as black as jet!  And
so large it is, you might see it anywheres.'

It was perfectly delightful to behold with what enthusiasm Mr.
Peggotty became inspired when he thought of his little favourite. 
He stands before me again, his bluff hairy face irradiating with a
joyful love and pride, for which I can find no description.  His
honest eyes fire up, and sparkle, as if their depths were stirred
by something bright.  His broad chest heaves with pleasure.  His
strong loose hands clench themselves, in his earnestness; and he
emphasizes what he says with a right arm that shows, in my pigmy
view, like a sledge-hammer.

Ham was quite as earnest as he.  I dare say they would have said
much more about her, if they had not been abashed by the unexpected
coming in of Steerforth, who, seeing me in a corner speaking with
two strangers, stopped in a song he was singing, and said: 'I
didn't know you were here, young Copperfield!' (for it was not the
usual visiting room) and crossed by us on his way out.

I am not sure whether it was in the pride of having such a friend
as Steerforth, or in the desire to explain to him how I came to
have such a friend as Mr. Peggotty, that I called to him as he was
going away.  But I said, modestly - Good Heaven, how it all comes
back to me this long time afterwards! -

'Don't go, Steerforth, if you please.  These are two Yarmouth
boatmen - very kind, good people - who are relations of my nurse,
and have come from Gravesend to see me.'

'Aye, aye?' said Steerforth, returning.  'I am glad to see them. 
How are you both?'

There was an ease in his manner - a gay and light manner it was,
but not swaggering - which I still believe to have borne a kind of
enchantment with it.  I still believe him, in virtue of this
carriage, his animal spirits, his delightful voice, his handsome
face and figure, and, for aught I know, of some inborn power of
attraction besides (which I think a few people possess), to have
carried a spell with him to which it was a natural weakness to
yield, and which not many persons could withstand.  I could not but
see how pleased they were with him, and how they seemed to open
their hearts to him in a moment.

'You must let them know at home, if you please, Mr. Peggotty,' I
said, 'when that letter is sent, that Mr. Steerforth is very kind
to me, and that I don't know what I should ever do here without
him.'

'Nonsense!' said Steerforth, laughing.  'You mustn't tell them
anything of the sort.'

'And if Mr. Steerforth ever comes into Norfolk or Suffolk, Mr.
Peggotty,' I said, 'while I am there, you may depend upon it I
shall bring him to Yarmouth, if he will let me, to see your house. 
You never saw such a good house, Steerforth.  It's made out of a
boat!'

'Made out of a boat, is it?' said Steerforth.  'It's the right sort
of a house for such a thorough-built boatman.'

'So 'tis, sir, so 'tis, sir,' said Ham, grinning.  'You're right,
young gen'l'm'n!  Mas'r Davy bor', gen'l'm'n's right.  A thorough-
built boatman!  Hor, hor!  That's what he is, too!'

Mr. Peggotty was no less pleased than his nephew, though his
modesty forbade him to claim a personal compliment so vociferously.

'Well, sir,' he said, bowing and chuckling, and tucking in the ends
of his neckerchief at his breast: 'I thankee, sir, I thankee!  I do
my endeavours in my line of life, sir.'

'The best of men can do no more, Mr. Peggotty,' said Steerforth. 
He had got his name already.

'I'll pound it, it's wot you do yourself, sir,' said Mr. Peggotty,
shaking his head, 'and wot you do well - right well!  I thankee,
sir.  I'm obleeged to you, sir, for your welcoming manner of me. 
I'm rough, sir, but I'm ready - least ways, I hope I'm ready, you
unnerstand.  My house ain't much for to see, sir, but it's hearty
at your service if ever you should come along with Mas'r Davy to
see it.  I'm a reg'lar Dodman, I am,' said Mr. Peggotty, by which
he meant snail, and this was in allusion to his being slow to go,
for he had attempted to go after every sentence, and had somehow or
other come back again; 'but I wish you both well, and I wish you
happy!'

Ham echoed this sentiment, and we parted with them in the heartiest
manner.  I was almost tempted that evening to tell Steerforth about
pretty little Em'ly, but I was too timid of mentioning her name,
and too much afraid of his laughing at me.  I remember that I
thought a good deal, and in an uneasy sort of way, about Mr.
Peggotty having said that she was getting on to be a woman; but I
decided that was nonsense.

We transported the shellfish, or the 'relish' as Mr. Peggotty had
modestly called it, up into our room unobserved, and made a great
supper that evening.  But Traddles couldn't get happily out of it. 
He was too unfortunate even to come through a supper like anybody
else.  He was taken ill in the night - quite prostrate he was - in
consequence of Crab; and after being drugged with black draughts
and blue pills, to an extent which Demple (whose father was a
doctor) said was enough to undermine a horse's constitution,
received a caning and six chapters of Greek Testament for refusing
to confess.

The rest of the half-year is a jumble in my recollection of the
daily strife and struggle of our lives; of the waning summer and
the changing season; of the frosty mornings when we were rung out
of bed, and the cold, cold smell of the dark nights when we were
rung into bed again; of the evening schoolroom dimly lighted and
indifferently warmed, and the morning schoolroom which was nothing
but a great shivering-machine; of the alternation of boiled beef
with roast beef, and boiled mutton with roast mutton; of clods of
bread-and-butter, dog's-eared lesson-books, cracked slates,
tear-blotted copy-books, canings, rulerings, hair-cuttings, rainy
Sundays, suet-puddings, and a dirty atmosphere of ink, surrounding
all.

I well remember though, how the distant idea of the holidays, after
seeming for an immense time to be a stationary speck, began to come
towards us, and to grow and grow.  How from counting months, we
came to weeks, and then to days; and how I then began to be afraid
that I should not be sent for and when I learnt from Steerforth
that I had been sent for, and was certainly to go home, had dim
forebodings that I might break my leg first.  How the breaking-up
day changed its place fast, at last, from the week after next to
next week, this week, the day after tomorrow, tomorrow, today,
tonight - when I was inside the Yarmouth mail, and going home.

I had many a broken sleep inside the Yarmouth mail, and many an
incoherent dream of all these things.  But when I awoke at
intervals, the ground outside the window was not the playground of
Salem House, and the sound in my ears was not the sound of Mr.
Creakle giving it to Traddles, but the sound of the coachman
touching up the horses.

CHAPTER 8
MY HOLIDAYS.  ESPECIALLY ONE HAPPY AFTERNOON

When we arrived before day at the inn where the mail stopped, which
was not the inn where my friend the waiter lived, I was shown up to
a nice little bedroom, with DOLPHIN painted on the door.  Very cold
I was, I know, notwithstanding the hot tea they had given me before
a large fire downstairs; and very glad I was to turn into the
Dolphin's bed, pull the Dolphin's blankets round my head, and go to
sleep.

Mr. Barkis the carrier was to call for me in the morning at nine
o'clock.  I got up at eight, a little giddy from the shortness of
my night's rest, and was ready for him before the appointed time. 
He received me exactly as if not five minutes had elapsed since we
were last together, and I had only been into the hotel to get
change for sixpence, or something of that sort.

As soon as I and my box were in the cart, and the carrier seated,
the lazy horse walked away with us all at his accustomed pace.

'You look very well, Mr. Barkis,' I said, thinking he would like to
know it.

Mr. Barkis rubbed his cheek with his cuff, and then looked at his
cuff as if he expected to find some of the bloom upon it; but made
no other acknowledgement of the compliment.

'I gave your message, Mr. Barkis,' I said: 'I wrote to Peggotty.'

'Ah!' said Mr. Barkis.

Mr. Barkis seemed gruff, and answered drily.

'Wasn't it right, Mr. Barkis?' I asked, after a little hesitation.

'Why, no,' said Mr. Barkis.

'Not the message?'

'The message was right enough, perhaps,' said Mr. Barkis; 'but it
come to an end there.'

Not understanding what he meant, I repeated inquisitively: 'Came to
an end, Mr. Barkis?'

'Nothing come of it,' he explained, looking at me sideways.  'No
answer.'

'There was an answer expected, was there, Mr. Barkis?' said I,
opening my eyes.  For this was a new light to me.

'When a man says he's willin',' said Mr. Barkis, turning his glance
slowly on me again, 'it's as much as to say, that man's a-waitin'
for a answer.'

'Well, Mr. Barkis?'

'Well,' said Mr. Barkis, carrying his eyes back to his horse's
ears; 'that man's been a-waitin' for a answer ever since.'

'Have you told her so, Mr. Barkis?'

'No - no,' growled Mr. Barkis, reflecting about it.  'I ain't got
no call to go and tell her so.  I never said six words to her
myself, I ain't a-goin' to tell her so.'

'Would you like me to do it, Mr. Barkis?' said I, doubtfully.
'You might tell her, if you would,' said Mr. Barkis, with another
slow look at me, 'that Barkis was a-waitin' for a answer.  Says you
- what name is it?'

'Her name?'

'Ah!' said Mr. Barkis, with a nod of his head.

'Peggotty.'

'Chrisen name?  Or nat'ral name?' said Mr. Barkis.

'Oh, it's not her Christian name.  Her Christian name is Clara.'

'Is it though?' said Mr. Barkis.

He seemed to find an immense fund of reflection in this
circumstance, and sat pondering and inwardly whistling for some
time.

'Well!' he resumed at length.  'Says you, "Peggotty!  Barkis is
waitin' for a answer."  Says she, perhaps, "Answer to what?"  Says
you, "To what I told you."  "What is that?" says she.  "Barkis is
willin'," says you.'

This extremely artful suggestion Mr. Barkis accompanied with a
nudge of his elbow that gave me quite a stitch in my side.  After
that, he slouched over his horse in his usual manner; and made no
other reference to the subject except, half an hour afterwards,
taking a piece of chalk from his pocket, and writing up, inside the
tilt of the cart, 'Clara Peggotty' - apparently as a private
memorandum.

Ah, what a strange feeling it was to be going home when it was not
home, and to find that every object I looked at, reminded me of the
happy old home, which was like a dream I could never dream again!
The days when my mother and I and Peggotty were all in all to one
another, and there was no one to come between us, rose up before me
so sorrowfully on the road, that I am not sure I was glad to be
there - not sure but that I would rather have remained away, and
forgotten it in Steerforth's company.  But there I was; and soon I
was at our house, where the bare old elm-trees wrung their many
hands in the bleak wintry air, and shreds of the old rooks'-nests
drifted away upon the wind.

The carrier put my box down at the garden-gate, and left me.  I
walked along the path towards the house, glancing at the windows,
and fearing at every step to see Mr. Murdstone or Miss Murdstone
lowering out of one of them.  No face appeared, however; and being
come to the house, and knowing how to open the door, before dark,
without knocking, I went in with a quiet, timid step.

God knows how infantine the memory may have been, that was awakened
within me by the sound of my mother's voice in the old parlour,
when I set foot in the hall.  She was singing in a low tone.  I
think I must have lain in her arms, and heard her singing so to me
when I was but a baby.  The strain was new to me, and yet it was so
old that it filled my heart brim-full; like a friend come back from
a long absence.

I believed, from the solitary and thoughtful way in which my mother
murmured her song, that she was alone.  And I went softly into the
room.  She was sitting by the fire, suckling an infant, whose tiny
hand she held against her neck.  Her eyes were looking down upon
its face, and she sat singing to it.  I was so far right, that she
had no other companion.

I spoke to her, and she started, and cried out.  But seeing me, she
called me her dear Davy, her own boy! and coming half across the
room to meet me, kneeled down upon the ground and kissed me, and
laid my head down on her bosom near the little creature that was
nestling there, and put its hand to my lips.

I wish I had died.  I wish I had died then, with that feeling in my
heart!  I should have been more fit for Heaven than I ever have
been since.

'He is your brother,' said my mother, fondling me.  'Davy, my
pretty boy!  My poor child!'  Then she kissed me more and more, and
clasped me round the neck.  This she was doing when Peggotty came
running in, and bounced down on the ground beside us, and went mad
about us both for a quarter of an hour.

It seemed that I had not been expected so soon, the carrier being
much before his usual time.  It seemed, too, that Mr. and Miss
Murdstone had gone out upon a visit in the neighbourhood, and would
not return before night.  I had never hoped for this.  I had never
thought it possible that we three could be together undisturbed,
once more; and I felt, for the time, as if the old days were come
back.

We dined together by the fireside.  Peggotty was in attendance to
wait upon us, but my mother wouldn't let her do it, and made her
dine with us.  I had my own old plate, with a brown view of a
man-of-war in full sail upon it, which Peggotty had hoarded
somewhere all the time I had been away, and would not have had
broken, she said, for a hundred pounds.  I had my own old mug with
David on it, and my own old little knife and fork that wouldn't
cut.

While we were at table, I thought it a favourable occasion to tell
Peggotty about Mr. Barkis, who, before I had finished what I had to
tell her, began to laugh, and throw her apron over her face.

'Peggotty,' said my mother.  'What's the matter?'

Peggotty only laughed the more, and held her apron tight over her
face when my mother tried to pull it away, and sat as if her head
were in a bag.

'What are you doing, you stupid creature?' said my mother,
laughing.

'Oh, drat the man!' cried Peggotty.  'He wants to marry me.'

'It would be a very good match for you; wouldn't it?' said my
mother.

'Oh!  I don't know,' said Peggotty.  'Don't ask me.  I wouldn't
have him if he was made of gold.  Nor I wouldn't have anybody.'

'Then, why don't you tell him so, you ridiculous thing?' said my
mother.

'Tell him so,' retorted Peggotty, looking out of her apron.  'He
has never said a word to me about it.  He knows better.  If he was
to make so bold as say a word to me, I should slap his face.'

Her own was as red as ever I saw it, or any other face, I think;
but she only covered it again, for a few moments at a time, when
she was taken with a violent fit of laughter; and after two or
three of those attacks, went on with her dinner.

I remarked that my mother, though she smiled when Peggotty looked
at her, became more serious and thoughtful.  I had seen at first
that she was changed.  Her face was very pretty still, but it
looked careworn, and too delicate; and her hand was so thin and
white that it seemed to me to be almost transparent.  But the
change to which I now refer was superadded to this: it was in her
manner, which became anxious and fluttered.  At last she said,
putting out her hand, and laying it affectionately on the hand of
her old servant,

'Peggotty, dear, you are not going to be married?'

'Me, ma'am?' returned Peggotty, staring.  'Lord bless you, no!'

'Not just yet?' said my mother, tenderly.

'Never!' cried Peggotty.

My mother took her hand, and said:

'Don't leave me, Peggotty.  Stay with me.  It will not be for long,
perhaps.  What should I ever do without you!'

'Me leave you, my precious!' cried Peggotty.  'Not for all the
world and his wife.  Why, what's put that in your silly little
head?' - For Peggotty had been used of old to talk to my mother
sometimes like a child.

But my mother made no answer, except to thank her, and Peggotty
went running on in her own fashion.

'Me leave you?  I think I see myself.  Peggotty go away from you? 
I should like to catch her at it!  No, no, no,' said Peggotty,
shaking her head, and folding her arms; 'not she, my dear.  It
isn't that there ain't some Cats that would be well enough pleased
if she did, but they sha'n't be pleased.  They shall be aggravated. 
I'll stay with you till I am a cross cranky old woman.  And when
I'm too deaf, and too lame, and too blind, and too mumbly for want
of teeth, to be of any use at all, even to be found fault with,
than I shall go to my Davy, and ask him to take me in.'

'And, Peggotty,' says I, 'I shall be glad to see you, and I'll make
you as welcome as a queen.'

'Bless your dear heart!' cried Peggotty.  'I know you will!'  And
she kissed me beforehand, in grateful acknowledgement of my
hospitality.  After that, she covered her head up with her apron
again and had another laugh about Mr. Barkis.  After that, she took
the baby out of its little cradle, and nursed it.  After that, she
cleared the dinner table; after that, came in with another cap on,
and her work-box, and the yard-measure, and the bit of wax-candle,
all just the same as ever.

We sat round the fire, and talked delightfully.  I told them what
a hard master Mr. Creakle was, and they pitied me very much.  I
told them what a fine fellow Steerforth was, and what a patron of
mine, and Peggotty said she would walk a score of miles to see him. 
I took the little baby in my arms when it was awake, and nursed it
lovingly.  When it was asleep again, I crept close to my mother's
side according to my old custom, broken now a long time, and sat
with my arms embracing her waist, and my little red cheek on her
shoulder, and once more felt her beautiful hair drooping over me -
like an angel's wing as I used to think, I recollect - and was very
happy indeed.

While I sat thus, looking at the fire, and seeing pictures in the
red-hot coals, I almost believed that I had never been away; that
Mr. and Miss Murdstone were such pictures, and would vanish when
the fire got low; and that there was nothing real in all that I
remembered, save my mother, Peggotty, and I.

Peggotty darned away at a stocking as long as she could see, and
then sat with it drawn on her left hand like a glove, and her
needle in her right, ready to take another stitch whenever there
was a blaze.  I cannot conceive whose stockings they can have been
that Peggotty was always darning, or where such an unfailing supply
of stockings in want of darning can have come from.  From my
earliest infancy she seems to have been always employed in that
class of needlework, and never by any chance in any other.

'I wonder,' said Peggotty, who was sometimes seized with a fit of
wondering on some most unexpected topic, 'what's become of Davy's
great-aunt?'
'Lor, Peggotty!' observed my mother, rousing herself from a
reverie, 'what nonsense you talk!'

'Well, but I really do wonder, ma'am,' said Peggotty.

'What can have put such a person in your head?' inquired my mother. 
'Is there nobody else in the world to come there?'

'I don't know how it is,' said Peggotty, 'unless it's on account of
being stupid, but my head never can pick and choose its people. 
They come and they go, and they don't come and they don't go, just
as they like.  I wonder what's become of her?'

'How absurd you are, Peggotty!' returned my mother.  'One would
suppose you wanted a second visit from her.'

'Lord forbid!' cried Peggotty.

'Well then, don't talk about such uncomfortable things, there's a
good soul,' said my mother.  'Miss Betsey is shut up in her cottage
by the sea, no doubt, and will remain there.  At all events, she is
not likely ever to trouble us again.'

'No!' mused Peggotty.  'No, that ain't likely at all.  - I wonder,
if she was to die, whether she'd leave Davy anything?'

'Good gracious me, Peggotty,' returned my mother, 'what a
nonsensical woman you are! when you know that she took offence at
the poor dear boy's ever being born at all.'

'I suppose she wouldn't be inclined to forgive him now,' hinted
Peggotty.

'Why should she be inclined to forgive him now?' said my mother,
rather sharply.

'Now that he's got a brother, I mean,' said Peggotty.

MY mother immediately began to cry, and wondered how Peggotty dared
to say such a thing.

'As if this poor little innocent in its cradle had ever done any
harm to you or anybody else, you jealous thing!' said she.  'You
had much better go and marry Mr. Barkis, the carrier.  Why don't
you?'

'I should make Miss Murdstone happy, if I was to,' said Peggotty.

'What a bad disposition you have, Peggotty!' returned my mother. 
'You are as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it is possible for a
ridiculous creature to be.  You want to keep the keys yourself, and
give out all the things, I suppose?  I shouldn't be surprised if
you did.  When you know that she only does it out of kindness and
the best intentions!  You know she does, Peggotty - you know it
well.'

Peggotty muttered something to the effect of 'Bother the best
intentions!' and something else to the effect that there was a
little too much of the best intentions going on.

'I know what you mean, you cross thing,' said my mother.  'I
understand you, Peggotty, perfectly.  You know I do, and I wonder
you don't colour up like fire.  But one point at a time.  Miss
Murdstone is the point now, Peggotty, and you sha'n't escape from
it.  Haven't you heard her say, over and over again, that she
thinks I am too thoughtless and too - a - a -'

'Pretty,' suggested Peggotty.

'Well,' returned my mother, half laughing, 'and if she is so silly
as to say so, can I be blamed for it?'

'No one says you can,' said Peggotty.

'No, I should hope not, indeed!' returned my mother.  'Haven't you
heard her say, over and over again, that on this account she wished
to spare me a great deal of trouble, which she thinks I am not
suited for, and which I really don't know myself that I AM suited
for; and isn't she up early and late, and going to and fro
continually - and doesn't she do all sorts of things, and grope
into all sorts of places, coal-holes and pantries and I don't know
where, that can't be very agreeable - and do you mean to insinuate
that there is not a sort of devotion in that?'

'I don't insinuate at all,' said Peggotty.

'You do, Peggotty,' returned my mother.  'You never do anything
else, except your work.  You are always insinuating.  You revel in
it.  And when you talk of Mr. Murdstone's good intentions -'

'I never talked of 'em,' said Peggotty.

'No, Peggotty,' returned my mother, 'but you insinuated.  That's
what I told you just now.  That's the worst of you.  You WILL
insinuate.  I said, at the moment, that I understood you, and you
see I did.  When you talk of Mr. Murdstone's good intentions, and
pretend to slight them (for I don't believe you really do, in your
heart, Peggotty), you must be as well convinced as I am how good
they are, and how they actuate him in everything.  If he seems to
have been at all stern with a certain person, Peggotty - you
understand, and so I am sure does Davy, that I am not alluding to
anybody present - it is solely because he is satisfied that it is
for a certain person's benefit.  He naturally loves a certain
person, on my account; and acts solely for a certain person's good. 
He is better able to judge of it than I am; for I very well know
that I am a weak, light, girlish creature, and that he is a firm,
grave, serious man.  And he takes,' said my mother, with the tears
which were engendered in her affectionate nature, stealing down her
face, 'he takes great pains with me; and I ought to be very
thankful to him, and very submissive to him even in my thoughts;
and when I am not, Peggotty, I worry and condemn myself, and feel
doubtful of my own heart, and don't know what to do.'

Peggotty sat with her chin on the foot of the stocking, looking
silently at the fire.

'There, Peggotty,' said my mother, changing her tone, 'don't let us
fall out with one another, for I couldn't bear it.  You are my true
friend, I know, if I have any in the world.  When I call you a
ridiculous creature, or a vexatious thing, or anything of that
sort, Peggotty, I only mean that you are my true friend, and always
have been, ever since the night when Mr. Copperfield first brought
me home here, and you came out to the gate to meet me.'

Peggotty was not slow to respond, and ratify the treaty of
friendship by giving me one of her best hugs.  I think I had some
glimpses of the real character of this conversation at the time;
but I am sure, now, that the good creature originated it, and took
her part in it, merely that my mother might comfort herself with
the little contradictory summary in which she had indulged.  The
design was efficacious; for I remember that my mother seemed more
at ease during the rest of the evening, and that Peggotty observed
her less.

When we had had our tea, and the ashes were thrown up, and the
candles snuffed, I read Peggotty a chapter out of the Crocodile
Book, in remembrance of old times - she took it out of her pocket:
I don't know whether she had kept it there ever since - and then we
talked about Salem House, which brought me round again to
Steerforth, who was my great subject.  We were very happy; and that
evening, as the last of its race, and destined evermore to close
that volume of my life, will never pass out of my memory.

It was almost ten o'clock before we heard the sound of wheels.  We
all got up then; and my mother said hurriedly that, as it was so
late, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone approved of early hours for young
people, perhaps I had better go to bed.  I kissed her, and went
upstairs with my candle directly, before they came in.  It appeared
to my childish fancy, as I ascended to the bedroom where I had been
imprisoned, that they brought a cold blast of air into the house
which blew away the old familiar feeling like a feather.

I felt uncomfortable about going down to breakfast in the morning,
as I had never set eyes on Mr. Murdstone since the day when I
committed my memorable offence.  However, as it must be done, I
went down, after two or three false starts half-way, and as many
runs back on tiptoe to my own room, and presented myself in the
parlour.

He was standing before the fire with his back to it, while Miss
Murdstone made the tea.  He looked at me steadily as I entered, but
made no sign of recognition whatever.
I went up to him, after a moment of confusion, and said: 'I beg
your pardon, sir.  I am very sorry for what I did, and I hope you
will forgive me.'

'I am glad to hear you are sorry, David,' he replied.

The hand he gave me was the hand I had bitten.  I could not
restrain my eye from resting for an instant on a red spot upon it;
but it was not so red as I turned, when I met that sinister
expression in his face.

'How do you do, ma'am?' I said to Miss Murdstone.

'Ah, dear me!' sighed Miss Murdstone, giving me the tea-caddy scoop
instead of her fingers.  'How long are the holidays?'

'A month, ma'am.'

'Counting from when?'

'From today, ma'am.'

'Oh!' said Miss Murdstone.  'Then here's one day off.'

She kept a calendar of the holidays in this way, and every morning
checked a day off in exactly the same manner.  She did it gloomily
until she came to ten, but when she got into two figures she became
more hopeful, and, as the time advanced, even jocular.

It was on this very first day that I had the misfortune to throw
her, though she was not subject to such weakness in general, into
a state of violent consternation.  I came into the room where she
and my mother were sitting; and the baby (who was only a few weeks
old) being on my mother's lap, I took it very carefully in my arms. 
Suddenly Miss Murdstone gave such a scream that I all but dropped
it.

'My dear Jane!' cried my mother.

'Good heavens, Clara, do you see?' exclaimed Miss Murdstone.

'See what, my dear Jane?' said my mother; 'where?'

'He's got it!' cried Miss Murdstone.  'The boy has got the baby!'

She was limp with horror; but stiffened herself to make a dart at
me, and take it out of my arms.  Then, she turned faint; and was so
very ill that they were obliged to give her cherry brandy.  I was
solemnly interdicted by her, on her recovery, from touching my
brother any more on any pretence whatever; and my poor mother, who,
I could see, wished otherwise, meekly confirmed the interdict, by
saying: 'No doubt you are right, my dear Jane.'

On another occasion, when we three were together, this same dear
baby - it was truly dear to me, for our mother's sake - was the
innocent occasion of Miss Murdstone's going into a passion.  My
mother, who had been looking at its eyes as it lay upon her lap,
said:

'Davy! come here!' and looked at mine.

I saw Miss Murdstone lay her beads down.

'I declare,' said my mother, gently, 'they are exactly alike.  I
suppose they are mine.  I think they are the colour of mine.  But
they are wonderfully alike.'

'What are you talking about, Clara?' said Miss Murdstone.

'My dear Jane,' faltered my mother, a little abashed by the harsh
tone of this inquiry, 'I find that the baby's eyes and Davy's are
exactly alike.'

'Clara!' said Miss Murdstone, rising angrily, 'you are a positive
fool sometimes.'

'My dear Jane,' remonstrated my mother.

'A positive fool,' said Miss Murdstone.  'Who else could compare my
brother's baby with your boy?  They are not at all alike.  They are
exactly unlike.  They are utterly dissimilar in all respects.  I
hope they will ever remain so.  I will not sit here, and hear such
comparisons made.'  With that she stalked out, and made the door
bang after her.

In short, I was not a favourite with Miss Murdstone.  In short, I
was not a favourite there with anybody, not even with myself; for
those who did like me could not show it, and those who did not,
showed it so plainly that I had a sensitive consciousness of always
appearing constrained, boorish, and dull.

I felt that I made them as uncomfortable as they made me.  If I
came into the room where they were, and they were talking together
and my mother seemed cheerful, an anxious cloud would steal over
her face from the moment of my entrance.  If Mr. Murdstone were in
his best humour, I checked him.  If Miss Murdstone were in her
worst, I intensified it.  I had perception enough to know that my
mother was the victim always; that she was afraid to speak to me or
to be kind to me, lest she should give them some offence by her
manner of doing so, and receive a lecture afterwards; that she was
not only ceaselessly afraid of her own offending, but of my
offending, and uneasily watched their looks if I only moved. 
Therefore I resolved to keep myself as much out of their way as I
could; and many a wintry hour did I hear the church clock strike,
when I was sitting in my cheerless bedroom, wrapped in my little
great-coat, poring over a book.

In the evening, sometimes, I went and sat with Peggotty in the
kitchen.  There I was comfortable, and not afraid of being myself. 
But neither of these resources was approved of in the parlour.  The
tormenting humour which was dominant there stopped them both.  I
was still held to be necessary to my poor mother's training, and,
as one of her trials, could not be suffered to absent myself.

'David,' said Mr. Murdstone, one day after dinner when I was going
to leave the room as usual; 'I am sorry to observe that you are of
a sullen disposition.'

'As sulky as a bear!' said Miss Murdstone.

I stood still, and hung my head.

'Now, David,' said Mr. Murdstone, 'a sullen obdurate disposition
is, of all tempers, the worst.'

'And the boy's is, of all such dispositions that ever I have seen,'
remarked his sister, 'the most confirmed and stubborn.  I think, my
dear Clara, even you must observe it?'

'I beg your pardon, my dear Jane,' said my mother, 'but are you
quite sure - I am certain you'll excuse me, my dear Jane - that you
understand Davy?'

'I should be somewhat ashamed of myself, Clara,' returned Miss
Murdstone, 'if I could not understand the boy, or any boy.  I don't
profess to be profound; but I do lay claim to common sense.'

'No doubt, my dear Jane,' returned my mother, 'your understanding
is very vigorous -'

'Oh dear, no!  Pray don't say that, Clara,' interposed Miss
Murdstone, angrily.

'But I am sure it is,' resumed my mother; 'and everybody knows it
is.  I profit so much by it myself, in many ways - at least I ought
to - that no one can be more convinced of it than myself; and
therefore I speak with great diffidence, my dear Jane, I assure
you.'

'We'll say I don't understand the boy, Clara,' returned Miss
Murdstone, arranging the little fetters on her wrists.  'We'll
agree, if you please, that I don't understand him at all.  He is
much too deep for me.  But perhaps my brother's penetration may
enable him to have some insight into his character.  And I believe
my brother was speaking on the subject when we - not very decently
- interrupted him.'

'I think, Clara,' said Mr. Murdstone, in a low grave voice, 'that
there may be better and more dispassionate judges of such a
question than you.'

'Edward,' replied my mother, timidly, 'you are a far better judge
of all questions than I pretend to be.  Both you and Jane are.  I
only said -'

'You only said something weak and inconsiderate,' he replied.  'Try
not to do it again, my dear Clara, and keep a watch upon yourself.'

MY mother's lips moved, as if she answered 'Yes, my dear Edward,'
but she said nothing aloud.

'I was sorry, David, I remarked,' said Mr. Murdstone, turning his
head and his eyes stiffly towards me, 'to observe that you are of
a sullen disposition.  This is not a character that I can suffer to
develop itself beneath my eyes without an effort at improvement. 
You must endeavour, sir, to change it.  We must endeavour to change
it for you.'

'I beg your pardon, sir,' I faltered.  'I have never meant to be
sullen since I came back.'

'Don't take refuge in a lie, sir!' he returned so fiercely, that I
saw my mother involuntarily put out her trembling hand as if to
interpose between us.  'You have withdrawn yourself in your
sullenness to your own room.  You have kept your own room when you
ought to have been here.  You know now, once for all, that I
require you to be here, and not there.  Further, that I require you
to bring obedience here.  You know me, David.  I will have it
done.'

Miss Murdstone gave a hoarse chuckle.

'I will have a respectful, prompt, and ready bearing towards
myself,' he continued, 'and towards Jane Murdstone, and towards
your mother.  I will not have this room shunned as if it were
infected, at the pleasure of a child.  Sit down.'

He ordered me like a dog, and I obeyed like a dog.

'One thing more,' he said.  'I observe that you have an attachment
to low and common company.  You are not to associate with servants. 
The kitchen will not improve you, in the many respects in which you
need improvement.  Of the woman who abets you, I say nothing -
since you, Clara,' addressing my mother in a lower voice, 'from old
associations and long-established fancies, have a weakness
respecting her which is not yet overcome.'

'A most unaccountable delusion it is!' cried Miss Murdstone.

'I only say,' he resumed, addressing me, 'that I disapprove of your
preferring such company as Mistress Peggotty, and that it is to be
abandoned.  Now, David, you understand me, and you know what will
be the consequence if you fail to obey me to the letter.'

I knew well - better perhaps than he thought, as far as my poor
mother was concerned - and I obeyed him to the letter.  I retreated
to my own room no more; I took refuge with Peggotty no more; but
sat wearily in the parlour day after day, looking forward to night,
and bedtime.

What irksome constraint I underwent, sitting in the same attitude
hours upon hours, afraid to move an arm or a leg lest Miss
Murdstone should complain (as she did on the least pretence) of my
restlessness, and afraid to move an eye lest she should light on
some look of dislike or scrutiny that would find new cause for
complaint in mine!  What intolerable dulness to sit listening to
the ticking of the clock; and watching Miss Murdstone's little
shiny steel beads as she strung them; and wondering whether she
would ever be married, and if so, to what sort of unhappy man; and
counting the divisions in the moulding of the chimney-piece; and
wandering away, with my eyes, to the ceiling, among the curls and
corkscrews in the paper on the wall!

What walks I took alone, down muddy lanes, in the bad winter
weather, carrying that parlour, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone in it,
everywhere: a monstrous load that I was obliged to bear, a daymare
that there was no possibility of breaking in, a weight that brooded
on my wits, and blunted them!

What meals I had in silence and embarrassment, always feeling that
there were a knife and fork too many, and that mine; an appetite
too many, and that mine; a plate and chair too many, and those
mine; a somebody too many, and that I!

What evenings, when the candles came, and I was expected to employ
myself, but, not daring to read an entertaining book, pored over
some hard-headed, harder-hearted treatise on arithmetic; when the
tables of weights and measures set themselves to tunes, as 'Rule
Britannia', or 'Away with Melancholy'; when they wouldn't stand
still to be learnt, but would go threading my grandmother's needle
through my unfortunate head, in at one ear and out at the other! 
What yawns and dozes I lapsed into, in spite of all my care; what
starts I came out of concealed sleeps with; what answers I never
got, to little observations that I rarely made; what a blank space
I seemed, which everybody overlooked, and yet was in everybody's
way; what a heavy relief it was to hear Miss Murdstone hail the
first stroke of nine at night, and order me to bed!

Thus the holidays lagged away, until the morning came when Miss
Murdstone said: 'Here's the last day off!' and gave me the closing
cup of tea of the vacation.

I was not sorry to go.  I had lapsed into a stupid state; but I was
recovering a little and looking forward to Steerforth, albeit Mr.
Creakle loomed behind him.  Again Mr. Barkis appeared at the gate,
and again Miss Murdstone in her warning voice, said: 'Clara!' when
my mother bent over me, to bid me farewell.

I kissed her, and my baby brother, and was very sorry then; but not
sorry to go away, for the gulf between us was there, and the
parting was there, every day.  And it is not so much the embrace
she gave me, that lives in my mind, though it was as fervent as
could be, as what followed the embrace.

I was in the carrier's cart when I heard her calling to me.  I
looked out, and she stood at the garden-gate alone, holding her
baby up in her arms for me to see.  It was cold still weather; and
not a hair of her head, nor a fold of her dress, was stirred, as
she looked intently at me, holding up her child.

So I lost her.  So I saw her afterwards, in my sleep at school - a
silent presence near my bed - looking at me with the same intent
face - holding up her baby in her arms.

CHAPTER 9
I HAVE A MEMORABLE BIRTHDAY

I PASS over all that happened at school, until the anniversary of
my birthday came round in March.  Except that Steerforth was more
to be admired than ever, I remember nothing.  He was going away at
the end of the half-year, if not sooner, and was more spirited and
independent than before in my eyes, and therefore more engaging
than before; but beyond this I remember nothing.  The great
remembrance by which that time is marked in my mind, seems to have
swallowed up all lesser recollections, and to exist alone.

It is even difficult for me to believe that there was a gap of full
two months between my return to Salem House and the arrival of that
birthday.  I can only understand that the fact was so, because I
know it must have been so; otherwise I should feel convinced that
there was no interval, and that the one occasion trod upon the
other's heels.

How well I recollect the kind of day it was!  I smell the fog that
hung about the place; I see the hoar frost, ghostly, through it; I
feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I look along the dim
perspective of the schoolroom, with a sputtering candle here and
there to light up the foggy morning, and the breath of the boys
wreathing and smoking in the raw cold as they blow upon their
fingers, and tap their feet upon the floor.  It was after
breakfast, and we had been summoned in from the playground, when
Mr. Sharp entered and said:

'David Copperfield is to go into the parlour.'

I expected a hamper from Peggotty, and brightened at the order. 
Some of the boys about me put in their claim not to be forgotten in
the distribution of the good things, as I got out of my seat with
great alacrity.

'Don't hurry, David,' said Mr. Sharp.  'There's time enough, my
boy, don't hurry.'

I might have been surprised by the feeling tone in which he spoke,
if I had given it a thought; but I gave it none until afterwards. 
I hurried away to the parlour; and there I found Mr. Creakle,
sitting at his breakfast with the cane and a newspaper before him,
and Mrs. Creakle with an opened letter in her hand.  But no hamper.

'David Copperfield,' said Mrs. Creakle, leading me to a sofa, and
sitting down beside me.  'I want to speak to you very particularly. 
I have something to tell you, my child.'

Mr. Creakle, at whom of course I looked, shook his head without
looking at me, and stopped up a sigh with a very large piece of
buttered toast.

'You are too young to know how the world changes every day,' said
Mrs. Creakle, 'and how the people in it pass away.  But we all have
to learn it, David; some of us when we are young, some of us when
we are old, some of us at all times of our lives.'

I looked at her earnestly.

'When you came away from home at the end of the vacation,' said
Mrs. Creakle, after a pause, 'were they all well?'  After another
pause, 'Was your mama well?'

I trembled without distinctly knowing why, and still looked at her
earnestly, making no attempt to answer.

'Because,' said she, 'I grieve to tell you that I hear this morning
your mama is very ill.'

A mist rose between Mrs. Creakle and me, and her figure seemed to
move in it for an instant.  Then I felt the burning tears run down
my face, and it was steady again.

'She is very dangerously ill,' she added.

I knew all now.

'She is dead.'

There was no need to tell me so.  I had already broken out into a
desolate cry, and felt an orphan in the wide world.

She was very kind to me.  She kept me there all day, and left me
alone sometimes; and I cried, and wore myself to sleep, and awoke
and cried again.  When I could cry no more, I began to think; and
then the oppression on my breast was heaviest, and my grief a dull
pain that there was no ease for.

And yet my thoughts were idle; not intent on the calamity that
weighed upon my heart, but idly loitering near it.  I thought of
our house shut up and hushed.  I thought of the little baby, who,
Mrs. Creakle said, had been pining away for some time, and who,
they believed, would die too.  I thought of my father's grave in
the churchyard, by our house, and of my mother lying there beneath
the tree I knew so well.  I stood upon a chair when I was left
alone, and looked into the glass to see how red my eyes were, and
how sorrowful my face.  I considered, after some hours were gone,
if my tears were really hard to flow now, as they seemed to be,
what, in connexion with my loss, it would affect me most to think
of when I drew near home - for I was going home to the funeral.  I
am sensible of having felt that a dignity attached to me among the
rest of the boys, and that I was important in my affliction.

If ever child were stricken with sincere grief, I was.  But I
remember that this importance was a kind of satisfaction to me,
when I walked in the playground that afternoon while the boys were
in school.  When I saw them glancing at me out of the windows, as
they went up to their classes, I felt distinguished, and looked
more melancholy, and walked slower.  When school was over, and they
came out and spoke to me, I felt it rather good in myself not to be
proud to any of them, and to take exactly the same notice of them
all, as before.

I was to go home next night; not by the mail, but by the heavy
night-coach, which was called the Farmer, and was principally used
by country-people travelling short intermediate distances upon the
road.  We had no story-telling that evening, and Traddles insisted
on lending me his pillow.  I don't know what good he thought it
would do me, for I had one of my own: but it was all he had to
lend, poor fellow, except a sheet of letter-paper full of
skeletons; and that he gave me at parting, as a soother of my
sorrows and a contribution to my peace of mind.

I left Salem House upon the morrow afternoon.  I little thought
then that I left it, never to return.  We travelled very slowly all
night, and did not get into Yarmouth before nine or ten o'clock in
the morning.  I looked out for Mr. Barkis, but he was not there;
and instead of him a fat, short-winded, merry-looking, little old
man in black, with rusty little bunches of ribbons at the knees of
his breeches, black stockings, and a broad-brimmed hat, came
puffing up to the coach window, and said:

'Master Copperfield?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Will you come with me, young sir, if you please,' he said, opening
the door, 'and I shall have the pleasure of taking you home.'

I put my hand in his, wondering who he was, and we walked away to
a shop in a narrow street, on which was written OMER, DRAPER,
TAILOR, HABERDASHER, FUNERAL FURNISHER, &c.  It was a close and
stifling little shop; full of all sorts of clothing, made and
unmade, including one window full of beaver-hats and bonnets.  We
went into a little back-parlour behind the shop, where we found
three young women at work on a quantity of black materials, which
were heaped upon the table, and little bits and cuttings of which
were littered all over the floor.  There was a good fire in the
room, and a breathless smell of warm black crape - I did not know
what the smell was then, but I know now.

The three young women, who appeared to be very industrious and
comfortable, raised their heads to look at me, and then went on
with their work.  Stitch, stitch, stitch.  At the same time there
came from a workshop across a little yard outside the window, a
regular sound of hammering that kept a kind of tune: RAT - tat-tat,
RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, without any variation.

'Well,' said my conductor to one of the three young women.  'How do
you get on, Minnie?'

'We shall be ready by the trying-on time,' she replied gaily,
without looking up.  'Don't you be afraid, father.'

Mr. Omer took off his broad-brimmed hat, and sat down and panted. 
He was so fat that he was obliged to pant some time before he could
say:

'That's right.'

'Father!' said Minnie, playfully.  'What a porpoise you do grow!'

'Well, I don't know how it is, my dear,' he replied, considering
about it.  'I am rather so.'

'You are such a comfortable man, you see,' said Minnie.  'You take
things so easy.'

'No use taking 'em otherwise, my dear,' said Mr. Omer.

'No, indeed,' returned his daughter.  'We are all pretty gay here,
thank Heaven!  Ain't we, father?'

'I hope so, my dear,' said Mr. Omer.  'As I have got my breath now,
I think I'll measure this young scholar.  Would you walk into the
shop, Master Copperfield?'

I preceded Mr. Omer, in compliance with his request; and after
showing me a roll of cloth which he said was extra super, and too
good mourning for anything short of parents, he took my various
dimensions, and put them down in a book.  While he was recording
them he called my attention to his stock in trade, and to certain
fashions which he said had 'just come up', and to certain other
fashions which he said had 'just gone out'.

'And by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint of
money,' said Mr. Omer.  'But fashions are like human beings.  They
come in, nobody knows when, why, or how; and they go out, nobody
knows when, why, or how.  Everything is like life, in my opinion,
if you look at it in that point of view.'

I was too sorrowful to discuss the question, which would possibly
have been beyond me under any circumstances; and Mr. Omer took me
back into the parlour, breathing with some difficulty on the way.

He then called down a little break-neck range of steps behind a
door: 'Bring up that tea and bread-and-butter!' which, after some
time, during which I sat looking about me and thinking, and
listening to the stitching in the room and the tune that was being
hammered across the yard, appeared on a tray, and turned out to be
for me.

'I have been acquainted with you,' said Mr. Omer, after watching me
for some minutes, during which I had not made much impression on
the breakfast, for the black things destroyed my appetite, 'I have
been acquainted with you a long time, my young friend.'

'Have you, sir?'

'All your life,' said Mr. Omer.  'I may say before it.  I knew your
father before you.  He was five foot nine and a half, and he lays
in five-and-twen-ty foot of ground.'

'RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat,' across the yard.

'He lays in five and twen-ty foot of ground, if he lays in a
fraction,' said Mr. Omer, pleasantly.  'It was either his request
or her direction, I forget which.'

'Do you know how my little brother is, sir?' I inquired.

Mr. Omer shook his head.

'RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat, RAT - tat-tat.'

'He is in his mother's arms,' said he.

'Oh, poor little fellow!  Is he dead?'

'Don't mind it more than you can help,' said Mr. Omer.  'Yes.  The
baby's dead.'

My wounds broke out afresh at this intelligence.  I left the
scarcely-tasted breakfast, and went and rested my head on another
table, in a corner of the little room, which Minnie hastily
cleared, lest I should spot the mourning that was lying there with
my tears.  She was a pretty, good-natured girl, and put my hair
away from my eyes with a soft, kind touch; but she was very
cheerful at having nearly finished her work and being in good time,
and was so different from me!

Presently the tune left off, and a good-looking young fellow came
across the yard into the room.  He had a hammer in his hand, and
his mouth was full of little nails, which he was obliged to take
out before he could speak.

'Well, Joram!' said Mr. Omer.  'How do you get on?'

'All right,' said Joram.  'Done, sir.'

Minnie coloured a little, and the other two girls smiled at one
another.

'What! you were at it by candle-light last night, when I was at the
club, then?  Were you?' said Mr. Omer, shutting up one eye.

'Yes,' said Joram.  'As you said we could make a little trip of it,
and go over together, if it was done, Minnie and me - and you.'

'Oh!  I thought you were going to leave me out altogether,' said
Mr. Omer, laughing till he coughed.

'- As you was so good as to say that,' resumed the young man, 'why
I turned to with a will, you see.  Will you give me your opinion of
it?'

'I will,' said Mr. Omer, rising.  'My dear'; and he stopped and
turned to me: 'would you like to see your -'

'No, father,' Minnie interposed.

'I thought it might be agreeable, my dear,' said Mr. Omer.  'But
perhaps you're right.'

I can't say how I knew it was my dear, dear mother's coffin that
they went to look at.  I had never heard one making; I had never
seen one that I know of.- but it came into my mind what the noise
was, while it was going on; and when the young man entered, I am
sure I knew what he had been doing.

The work being now finished, the two girls, whose names I had not
heard, brushed the shreds and threads from their dresses, and went
into the shop to put that to rights, and wait for customers. 
Minnie stayed behind to fold up what they had made, and pack it in
two baskets.  This she did upon her knees, humming a lively little
tune the while.  Joram, who I had no doubt was her lover, came in
and stole a kiss from her while she was busy (he didn't appear to
mind me, at all), and said her father was gone for the chaise, and
he must make haste and get himself ready.  Then he went out again;
and then she put her thimble and scissors in her pocket, and stuck
a needle threaded with black thread neatly in the bosom of her
gown, and put on her outer clothing smartly, at a little glass
behind the door, in which I saw the reflection of her pleased face.

All this I observed, sitting at the table in the corner with my
head leaning on my hand, and my thoughts running on very different
things.  The chaise soon came round to the front of the shop, and
the baskets being put in first, I was put in next, and those three
followed.  I remember it as a kind of half chaise-cart, half
pianoforte-van, painted of a sombre colour, and drawn by a black
horse with a long tail.  There was plenty of room for us all.

I do not think I have ever experienced so strange a feeling in my
life (I am wiser now, perhaps) as that of being with them,
remembering how they had been employed, and seeing them enjoy the
ride.  I was not angry with them; I was more afraid of them, as if
I were cast away among creatures with whom I had no community of
nature.  They were very cheerful.  The old man sat in front to
drive, and the two young people sat behind him, and whenever he
spoke to them leaned forward, the one on one side of his chubby
face and the other on the other, and made a great deal of him. 
They would have talked to me too, but I held back, and moped in my
corner; scared by their love-making and hilarity, though it was far
from boisterous, and almost wondering that no judgement came upon
them for their hardness of heart.

So, when they stopped to bait the horse, and ate and drank and
enjoyed themselves, I could touch nothing that they touched, but
kept my fast unbroken.  So, when we reached home, I dropped out of
the chaise behind, as quickly as possible, that I might not be in
their company before those solemn windows, looking blindly on me
like closed eyes once bright.  And oh, how little need I had had to
think what would move me to tears when I came back - seeing the
window of my mother's room, and next it that which, in the better
time, was mine!

I was in Peggotty's arms before I got to the door, and she took me
into the house.  Her grief burst out when she first saw me; but she
controlled it soon, and spoke in whispers, and walked softly, as if
the dead could be disturbed.  She had not been in bed, I found, for
a long time.  She sat up at night still, and watched.  As long as
her poor dear pretty was above the ground, she said, she would
never desert her.

Mr. Murdstone took no heed of me when I went into the parlour where
he was, but sat by the fireside, weeping silently, and pondering in
his elbow-chair.  Miss Murdstone, who was busy at her writing-desk,
which was covered with letters and papers, gave me her cold
finger-nails, and asked me, in an iron whisper, if I had been
measured for my mourning.

I said: 'Yes.'

'And your shirts,' said Miss Murdstone; 'have you brought 'em
home?'

'Yes, ma'am.  I have brought home all my clothes.'

This was all the consolation that her firmness administered to me. 
I do not doubt that she had a choice pleasure in exhibiting what
she called her self-command, and her firmness, and her strength of
mind, and her common sense, and the whole diabolical catalogue of
her unamiable qualities, on such an occasion.  She was particularly
proud of her turn for business; and she showed it now in reducing
everything to pen and ink, and being moved by nothing.  All the
rest of that day, and from morning to night afterwards, she sat at
that desk, scratching composedly with a hard pen, speaking in the
same imperturbable whisper to everybody; never relaxing a muscle of
her face, or softening a tone of her voice, or appearing with an
atom of her dress astray.

Her brother took a book sometimes, but never read it that I saw. 
He would open it and look at it as if he were reading, but would
remain for a whole hour without turning the leaf, and then put it
down and walk to and fro in the room.  I used to sit with folded
hands watching him, and counting his footsteps, hour after hour. 
He very seldom spoke to her, and never to me.  He seemed to be the
only restless thing, except the clocks, in the whole motionless
house.

In these days before the funeral, I saw but little of Peggotty,
except that, in passing up or down stairs, I always found her close
to the room where my mother and her baby lay, and except that she
came to me every night, and sat by my bed's head while I went to
sleep.  A day or two before the burial - I think it was a day or
two before, but I am conscious of confusion in my mind about that
heavy time, with nothing to mark its progress - she took me into
the room.  I only recollect that underneath some white covering on
the bed, with a beautiful cleanliness and freshness all around it,
there seemed to me to lie embodied the solemn stillness that was in
the house; and that when she would have turned the cover gently
back, I cried: 'Oh no!  oh no!' and held her hand.

If the funeral had been yesterday, I could not recollect it better. 
The very air of the best parlour, when I went in at the door, the
bright condition of the fire, the shining of the wine in the
decanters, the patterns of the glasses and plates, the faint sweet
smell of cake, the odour of Miss Murdstone's dress, and our black
clothes.  Mr. Chillip is in the room, and comes to speak to me.

'And how is Master David?' he says, kindly.

I cannot tell him very well.  I give him my hand, which he holds in
his.

'Dear me!' says Mr. Chillip, meekly smiling, with something shining
in his eye.  'Our little friends grow up around us.  They grow out
of our knowledge, ma'am?'  This is to Miss Murdstone, who makes no
reply.

'There is a great improvement here, ma'am?' says Mr. Chillip.

Miss Murdstone merely answers with a frown and a formal bend: Mr.
Chillip, discomfited, goes into a corner, keeping me with him, and
opens his mouth no more.

I remark this, because I remark everything that happens, not
because I care about myself, or have done since I came home.  And
now the bell begins to sound, and Mr. Omer and another come to make
us ready.  As Peggotty was wont to tell me, long ago, the followers
of my father to the same grave were made ready in the same room.

There are Mr. Murdstone, our neighbour Mr. Grayper, Mr. Chillip,
and I.  When we go out to the door, the Bearers and their load are
in the garden; and they move before us down the path, and past the
elms, and through the gate, and into the churchyard, where I have
so often heard the birds sing on a summer morning.

We stand around the grave.  The day seems different to me from
every other day, and the light not of the same colour - of a sadder
colour.  Now there is a solemn hush, which we have brought from
home with what is resting in the mould; and while we stand
bareheaded, I hear the voice of the clergyman, sounding remote in
the open air, and yet distinct and plain, saying: 'I am the
Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord!'  Then I hear sobs; and,
standing apart among the lookers-on, I see that good and faithful
servant, whom of all the people upon earth I love the best, and
unto whom my childish heart is certain that the Lord will one day
say: 'Well done.'

There are many faces that I know, among the little crowd; faces
that I knew in church, when mine was always wondering there; faces
that first saw my mother, when she came to the village in her
youthful bloom.  I do not mind them - I mind nothing but my grief
- and yet I see and know them all; and even in the background, far
away, see Minnie looking on, and her eye glancing on her
sweetheart, who is near me.

It is over, and the earth is filled in, and we turn to come away. 
Before us stands our house, so pretty and unchanged, so linked in
my mind with the young idea of what is gone, that all my sorrow has
been nothing to the sorrow it calls forth.  But they take me on;
and Mr. Chillip talks to me; and when we get home, puts some water
to my lips; and when I ask his leave to go up to my room, dismisses
me with the gentleness of a woman.

All this, I say, is yesterday's event.  Events of later date have
floated from me to the shore where all forgotten things will
reappear, but this stands like a high rock in the ocean.

I knew that Peggotty would come to me in my room.  The Sabbath
stillness of the time (the day was so like Sunday!  I have
forgotten that) was suited to us both.  She sat down by my side
upon my little bed; and holding my hand, and sometimes putting it
to her lips, and sometimes smoothing it with hers, as she might
have comforted my little brother, told me, in her way, all that she
had to tell concerning what had happened.

'She was never well,' said Peggotty, 'for a long time.  She was
uncertain in her mind, and not happy.  When her baby was born, I
thought at first she would get better, but she was more delicate,
and sunk a little every day.  She used to like to sit alone before
her baby came, and then she cried; but afterwards she used to sing
to it - so soft, that I once thought, when I heard her, it was like
a voice up in the air, that was rising away.

'I think she got to be more timid, and more frightened-like, of
late; and that a hard word was like a blow to her.  But she was
always the same to me.  She never changed to her foolish Peggotty,
didn't my sweet girl.'

Here Peggotty stopped, and softly beat upon my hand a little while.

'The last time that I saw her like her own old self, was the night
when you came home, my dear.  The day you went away, she said to
me, "I never shall see my pretty darling again.  Something tells me
so, that tells the truth, I know."

'She tried to hold up after that; and many a time, when they told
her she was thoughtless and light-hearted, made believe to be so;
but it was all a bygone then.  She never told her husband what she
had told me - she was afraid of saying it to anybody else - till
one night, a little more than a week before it happened, when she
said to him: "My dear, I think I am dying."

'"It's off my mind now, Peggotty," she told me, when I laid her in
her bed that night.  "He will believe it more and more, poor
fellow, every day for a few days to come; and then it will be past. 
I am very tired.  If this is sleep, sit by me while I sleep: don't
leave me.  God bless both my children!  God protect and keep my
fatherless boy!"

'I never left her afterwards,' said Peggotty.  'She often talked to
them two downstairs - for she loved them; she couldn't bear not to
love anyone who was about her - but when they went away from her
bed-side, she always turned to me, as if there was rest where
Peggotty was, and never fell asleep in any other way.

'On the last night, in the evening, she kissed me, and said: "If my
baby should die too, Peggotty, please let them lay him in my arms,
and bury us together."  (It was done; for the poor lamb lived but
a day beyond her.) "Let my dearest boy go with us to our
resting-place," she said, "and tell him that his mother, when she
lay here, blessed him not once, but a thousand times."'

Another silence followed this, and another gentle beating on my
hand.

'It was pretty far in the night,' said Peggotty, 'when she asked me
for some drink; and when she had taken it, gave me such a patient
smile, the dear! - so beautiful!

'Daybreak had come, and the sun was rising, when she said to me,
how kind and considerate Mr. Copperfield had always been to her,
and how he had borne with her, and told her, when she doubted
herself, that a loving heart was better and stronger than wisdom,
and that he was a happy man in hers.  "Peggotty, my dear," she said
then, "put me nearer to you," for she was very weak.  "Lay your
good arm underneath my neck," she said, "and turn me to you, for
your face is going far off, and I want it to be near."  I put it as
she asked; and oh Davy! the time had come when my first parting
words to you were true - when she was glad to lay her poor head on
her stupid cross old Peggotty's arm - and she died like a child
that had gone to sleep!'

Thus ended Peggotty's narration.  From the moment of my knowing of
the death of my mother, the idea of her as she had been of late had
vanished from me.  I remembered her, from that instant, only as the
young mother of my earliest impressions, who had been used to wind
her bright curls round and round her finger, and to dance with me
at twilight in the parlour.  What Peggotty had told me now, was so
far from bringing me back to the later period, that it rooted the
earlier image in my mind.  It may be curious, but it is true.  In
her death she winged her way back to her calm untroubled youth, and
cancelled all the rest.

The mother who lay in the grave, was the mother of my infancy; the
little creature in her arms, was myself, as I had once been, hushed
for ever on her bosom.

CHAPTER 10
I BECOME NEGLECTED, AND AM PROVIDED FOR

The first act of business Miss Murdstone performed when the day of
the solemnity was over, and light was freely admitted into the
house, was to give Peggotty a month's warning.  Much as Peggotty
would have disliked such a service, I believe she would have
retained it, for my sake, in preference to the best upon earth. 
She told me we must part, and told me why; and we condoled with one
another, in all sincerity.

As to me or my future, not a word was said, or a step taken.  Happy
they would have been, I dare say, if they could have dismissed me
at a month's warning too.  I mustered courage once, to ask Miss
Murdstone when I was going back to school; and she answered dryly,
she believed I was not going back at all.  I was told nothing more. 
I was very anxious to know what was going to be done with me, and
so was Peggotty; but neither she nor I could pick up any
information on the subject.

There was one change in my condition, which, while it relieved me
of a great deal of present uneasiness, might have made me, if I had
been capable of considering it closely, yet more uncomfortable
about the future.  It was this.  The constraint that had been put
upon me, was quite abandoned.  I was so far from being required to
keep my dull post in the parlour, that on several occasions, when
I took my seat there, Miss Murdstone frowned to me to go away.  I
was so far from being warned off from Peggotty's society, that,
provided I was not in Mr. Murdstone's, I was never sought out or
inquired for.  At first I was in daily dread of his taking my
education in hand again, or of Miss Murdstone's devoting herself to
it; but I soon began to think that such fears were groundless, and
that all I had to anticipate was neglect.

I do not conceive that this discovery gave me much pain then.  I
was still giddy with the shock of my mother's death, and in a kind
of stunned state as to all tributary things.  I can recollect,
indeed, to have speculated, at odd times, on the possibility of my
not being taught any more, or cared for any more; and growing up to
be a shabby, moody man, lounging an idle life away, about the
village; as well as on the feasibility of my getting rid of this
picture by going away somewhere, like the hero in a story, to seek
my fortune: but these were transient visions, daydreams I sat
looking at sometimes, as if they were faintly painted or written on
the wall of my room, and which, as they melted away, left the wall
blank again.

'Peggotty,' I said in a thoughtful whisper, one evening, when I was
warming my hands at the kitchen fire, 'Mr. Murdstone likes me less
than he used to.  He never liked me much, Peggotty; but he would
rather not even see me now, if he can help it.'

'Perhaps it's his sorrow,' said Peggotty, stroking my hair.

'I am sure, Peggotty, I am sorry too.  If I believed it was his
sorrow, I should not think of it at all.  But it's not that; oh,
no, it's not that.'

'How do you know it's not that?' said Peggotty, after a silence.

'Oh, his sorrow is another and quite a different thing.  He is
sorry at this moment, sitting by the fireside with Miss Murdstone;
but if I was to go in, Peggotty, he would be something besides.'

'What would he be?' said Peggotty.

'Angry,' I answered, with an involuntary imitation of his dark
frown.  'If he was only sorry, he wouldn't look at me as he does. 
I am only sorry, and it makes me feel kinder.'

Peggotty said nothing for a little while; and I warmed my hands, as
silent as she.

'Davy,' she said at length.

'Yes, Peggotty?'
'I have tried, my dear, all ways I could think of - all the ways
there are, and all the ways there ain't, in short - to get a
suitable service here, in Blunderstone; but there's no such a
thing, my love.'

'And what do you mean to do, Peggotty,' says I, wistfully.  'Do you
mean to go and seek your fortune?'

'I expect I shall be forced to go to Yarmouth,' replied Peggotty,
'and live there.'

'You might have gone farther off,' I said, brightening a little,
'and been as bad as lost.  I shall see you sometimes, my dear old
Peggotty, there.  You won't be quite at the other end of the world,
will you?'

'Contrary ways, please God!' cried Peggotty, with great animation. 
'As long as you are here, my pet, I shall come over every week of
my life to see you.  One day, every week of my life!'

I felt a great weight taken off my mind by this promise: but even
this was not all, for Peggotty went on to say:

'I'm a-going, Davy, you see, to my brother's, first, for another
fortnight's visit - just till I have had time to look about me, and
get to be something like myself again.  Now, I have been thinking
that perhaps, as they don't want you here at present, you might be
let to go along with me.'

If anything, short of being in a different relation to every one
about me, Peggotty excepted, could have given me a sense of
pleasure at that time, it would have been this project of all
others.  The idea of being again surrounded by those honest faces,
shining welcome on me; of renewing the peacefulness of the sweet
Sunday morning, when the bells were ringing, the stones dropping in
the water, and the shadowy ships breaking through the mist; of
roaming up and down with little Em'ly, telling her my troubles, and
finding charms against them in the shells and pebbles on the beach;
made a calm in my heart.  It was ruffled next moment, to be sure,
by a doubt of Miss Murdstone's giving her consent; but even that
was set at rest soon, for she came out to take an evening grope in
the store-closet while we were yet in conversation, and Peggotty,
with a boldness that amazed me, broached the topic on the spot.

'The boy will be idle there,' said Miss Murdstone, looking into a
pickle-jar, 'and idleness is the root of all evil.  But, to be
sure, he would be idle here - or anywhere, in my opinion.'

Peggotty had an angry answer ready, I could see; but she swallowed
it for my sake, and remained silent.

'Humph!' said Miss Murdstone, still keeping her eye on the pickles;
'it is of more importance than anything else - it is of paramount
importance - that my brother should not be disturbed or made
uncomfortable.  I suppose I had better say yes.'

I thanked her, without making any demonstration of joy, lest it
should induce her to withdraw her assent.  Nor could I help
thinking this a prudent course, since she looked at me out of the
pickle-jar, with as great an access of sourness as if her black
eyes had absorbed its contents.  However, the permission was given,
and was never retracted; for when the month was out, Peggotty and
I were ready to depart.

Mr. Barkis came into the house for Peggotty's boxes.  I had never
known him to pass the garden-gate before, but on this occasion he
came into the house.  And he gave me a look as he shouldered the
largest box and went out, which I thought had meaning in it, if
meaning could ever be said to find its way into Mr. Barkis's
visage.

Peggotty was naturally in low spirits at leaving what had been her
home so many years, and where the two strong attachments of her
life - for my mother and myself - had been formed.  She had been
walking in the churchyard, too, very early; and she got into the
cart, and sat in it with her handkerchief at her eyes.

So long as she remained in this condition, Mr. Barkis gave no sign
of life whatever.  He sat in his usual place and attitude like a
great stuffed figure.  But when she began to look about her, and to
speak to me, he nodded his head and grinned several times.  I have
not the least notion at whom, or what he meant by it.

'It's a beautiful day, Mr. Barkis!' I said, as an act of
politeness.

'It ain't bad,' said Mr. Barkis, who generally qualified his
speech, and rarely committed himself.

'Peggotty is quite comfortable now, Mr. Barkis,' I remarked, for
his satisfaction.

'Is she, though?' said Mr. Barkis.

After reflecting about it, with a sagacious air, Mr. Barkis eyed
her, and said:

'ARE you pretty comfortable?'

Peggotty laughed, and answered in the affirmative.

'But really and truly, you know.  Are you?' growled Mr. Barkis,
sliding nearer to her on the seat, and nudging her with his elbow. 
'Are you?  Really and truly pretty comfortable?  Are you?  Eh?'

At each of these inquiries Mr. Barkis shuffled nearer to her, and
gave her another nudge; so that at last we were all crowded
together in the left-hand corner of the cart, and I was so squeezed
that I could hardly bear it.

Peggotty calling his attention to my sufferings, Mr. Barkis gave me
a little more room at once, and got away by degrees.  But I could
not help observing that he seemed to think he had hit upon a
wonderful expedient for expressing himself in a neat, agreeable,
and pointed manner, without the inconvenience of inventing
conversation.  He manifestly chuckled over it for some time.  By
and by he turned to Peggotty again, and repeating, 'Are you pretty
comfortable though?' bore down upon us as before, until the breath
was nearly edged out of my body.  By and by he made another descent
upon us with the same inquiry, and the same result.  At length, I
got up whenever I saw him coming, and standing on the foot-board,
pretended to look at the prospect; after which I did very well.

He was so polite as to stop at a public-house, expressly on our
account, and entertain us with broiled mutton and beer.  Even when
Peggotty was in the act of drinking, he was seized with one of
those approaches, and almost choked her.  But as we drew nearer to
the end of our journey, he had more to do and less time for
gallantry; and when we got on Yarmouth pavement, we were all too
much shaken and jolted, I apprehend, to have any leisure for
anything else.

Mr. Peggotty and Ham waited for us at the old place.  They received
me and Peggotty in an affectionate manner, and shook hands with Mr.
Barkis, who, with his hat on the very back of his head, and a
shame-faced leer upon his countenance, and pervading his very legs,
presented but a vacant appearance, I thought.  They each took one
of Peggotty's trunks, and we were going away, when Mr. Barkis
solemnly made a sign to me with his forefinger to come under an
archway.

'I say,' growled Mr. Barkis, 'it was all right.'

I looked up into his face, and answered, with an attempt to be very
profound: 'Oh!'

'It didn't come to a end there,' said Mr. Barkis, nodding
confidentially.  'It was all right.'

Again I answered, 'Oh!'

'You know who was willin',' said my friend.  'It was Barkis, and
Barkis only.'

I nodded assent.

'It's all right,' said Mr. Barkis, shaking hands; 'I'm a friend of
your'n.  You made it all right, first.  It's all right.'

In his attempts to be particularly lucid, Mr. Barkis was so
extremely mysterious, that I might have stood looking in his face
for an hour, and most assuredly should have got as much information
out of it as out of the face of a clock that had stopped, but for
Peggotty's calling me away.  As we were going along, she asked me
what he had said; and I told her he had said it was all right.

'Like his impudence,' said Peggotty, 'but I don't mind that!  Davy
dear, what should you think if I was to think of being married?'

'Why - I suppose you would like me as much then, Peggotty, as you
do now?' I returned, after a little consideration.

Greatly to the astonishment of the passengers in the street, as
well as of her relations going on before, the good soul was obliged
to stop and embrace me on the spot, with many protestations of her
unalterable love.

'Tell me what should you say, darling?' she asked again, when this
was over, and we were walking on.

'If you were thinking of being married - to Mr. Barkis, Peggotty?'

'Yes,' said Peggotty.

'I should think it would be a very good thing.  For then you know,
Peggotty, you would always have the horse and cart to bring you
over to see me, and could come for nothing, and be sure of coming.'

'The sense of the dear!' cried Peggotty.  'What I have been
thinking of, this month back!  Yes, my precious; and I think I
should be more independent altogether, you see; let alone my
working with a better heart in my own house, than I could in
anybody else's now.  I don't know what I might be fit for, now, as
a servant to a stranger.  And I shall be always near my pretty's
resting-place,' said Peggotty, musing, 'and be able to see it when
I like; and when I lie down to rest, I may be laid not far off from
my darling girl!'

We neither of us said anything for a little while.

'But I wouldn't so much as give it another thought,' said Peggotty,
cheerily 'if my Davy was anyways against it - not if I had been
asked in church thirty times three times over, and was wearing out
the ring in my pocket.'

'Look at me, Peggotty,' I replied; 'and see if I am not really
glad, and don't truly wish it!'  As indeed I did, with all my
heart.

'Well, my life,' said Peggotty, giving me a squeeze, 'I have
thought of it night and day, every way I can, and I hope the right
way; but I'll think of it again, and speak to my brother about it,
and in the meantime we'll keep it to ourselves, Davy, you and me. 
Barkis is a good plain creature,' said Peggotty, 'and if I tried to
do my duty by him, I think it would be my fault if I wasn't - if I
wasn't pretty comfortable,' said Peggotty, laughing heartily.
This quotation from Mr. Barkis was so appropriate, and tickled us
both so much, that we laughed again and again, and were quite in a
pleasant humour when we came within view of Mr. Peggotty's cottage.

It looked just the same, except that it may, perhaps, have shrunk
a little in my eyes; and Mrs. Gummidge was waiting at the door as
if she had stood there ever since.  All within was the same, down
to the seaweed in the blue mug in my bedroom.  I went into the
out-house to look about me; and the very same lobsters, crabs, and
crawfish possessed by the same desire to pinch the world in
general, appeared to be in the same state of conglomeration in the

same old corner.

But there was no little Em'ly to be seen, so I asked Mr. Peggotty
where she was.

'She's at school, sir,' said Mr. Peggotty, wiping the heat
consequent on the porterage of Peggotty's box from his forehead;
'she'll be home,' looking at the Dutch clock, 'in from twenty
minutes to half-an-hour's time.  We all on us feel the loss of her,
bless ye!'

Mrs. Gummidge moaned.

'Cheer up, Mawther!' cried Mr. Peggotty.

'I feel it more than anybody else,' said Mrs. Gummidge; 'I'm a lone
lorn creetur', and she used to be a'most the only thing that didn't
go contrary with me.'

Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her head, applied herself to
blowing the fire.  Mr. Peggotty, looking round upon us while she
was so engaged, said in a low voice, which he shaded with his hand:
'The old 'un!'  From this I rightly conjectured that no improvement
had taken place since my last visit in the state of Mrs. Gummidge's
spirits.

Now, the whole place was, or it should have been, quite as
delightful a place as ever; and yet it did not impress me in the
same way.  I felt rather disappointed with it.  Perhaps it was
because little Em'ly was not at home.  I knew the way by which she
would come, and presently found myself strolling along the path to
meet her.

A figure appeared in the distance before long, and I soon knew it
to be Em'ly, who was a little creature still in stature, though she
was grown.  But when she drew nearer, and I saw her blue eyes
looking bluer, and her dimpled face looking brighter, and her whole
self prettier and gayer, a curious feeling came over me that made
me pretend not to know her, and pass by as if I were looking at
something a long way off.  I have done such a thing since in later
life, or I am mistaken.

Little Em'ly didn't care a bit.  She saw me well enough; but
instead of turning round and calling after me, ran away laughing. 
This obliged me to run after her, and she ran so fast that we were
very near the cottage before I caught her.

'Oh, it's you, is it?' said little Em'ly.

'Why, you knew who it was, Em'ly,' said I.

'And didn't YOU know who it was?' said Em'ly.  I was going to kiss
her, but she covered her cherry lips with her hands, and said she
wasn't a baby now, and ran away, laughing more than ever, into the
house.

She seemed to delight in teasing me, which was a change in her I
wondered at very much.  The tea table was ready, and our little
locker was put out in its old place, but instead of coming to sit
by me, she went and bestowed her company upon that grumbling Mrs.
Gummidge: and on Mr. Peggotty's inquiring why, rumpled her hair all
over her face to hide it, and could do nothing but laugh.

'A little puss, it is!' said Mr. Peggotty, patting her with his
great hand.

'So sh' is!  so sh' is!' cried Ham.  'Mas'r Davy bor', so sh' is!'
and he sat and chuckled at her for some time, in a state of mingled
admiration and delight, that made his face a burning red.

Little Em'ly was spoiled by them all, in fact; and by no one more
than Mr. Peggotty himself, whom she could have coaxed into
anything, by only going and laying her cheek against his rough
whisker.  That was my opinion, at least, when I saw her do it; and
I held Mr. Peggotty to be thoroughly in the right.  But she was so
affectionate and sweet-natured, and had such a pleasant manner of
being both sly and shy at once, that she captivated me more than
ever.

She was tender-hearted, too; for when, as we sat round the fire
after tea, an allusion was made by Mr. Peggotty over his pipe to
the loss I had sustained, the tears stood in her eyes, and she
looked at me so kindly across the table, that I felt quite thankful
to her.

'Ah!' said Mr. Peggotty, taking up her curls, and running them over
his hand like water, 'here's another orphan, you see, sir.  And
here,' said Mr. Peggotty, giving Ham a backhanded knock in the
chest, 'is another of 'em, though he don't look much like it.'

'If I had you for my guardian, Mr. Peggotty,' said I, shaking my
head, 'I don't think I should FEEL much like it.'

'Well said, Mas'r Davy bor'!' cried Ham, in an ecstasy.  'Hoorah! 
Well said!  Nor more you wouldn't!  Hor!  Hor!' - Here he returned
Mr. Peggotty's back-hander, and little Em'ly got up and kissed Mr.
Peggotty.  'And how's your friend, sir?' said Mr. Peggotty to me.

'Steerforth?' said I.

'That's the name!' cried Mr. Peggotty, turning to Ham.  'I knowed
it was something in our way.'

'You said it was Rudderford,' observed Ham, laughing.

'Well!' retorted Mr. Peggotty.  'And ye steer with a rudder, don't
ye?  It ain't fur off.  How is he, sir?'

'He was very well indeed when I came away, Mr. Peggotty.'

'There's a friend!' said Mr. Peggotty, stretching out his pipe. 
'There's a friend, if you talk of friends!  Why, Lord love my heart
alive, if it ain't a treat to look at him!'

'He is very handsome, is he not?' said I, my heart warming with
this praise.

'Handsome!' cried Mr. Peggotty.  'He stands up to you like - like
a - why I don't know what he don't stand up to you like.  He's so
bold!'

'Yes!  That's just his character,' said I.  'He's as brave as a
lion, and you can't think how frank he is, Mr. Peggotty.'

'And I do suppose, now,' said Mr. Peggotty, looking at me through
the smoke of his pipe, 'that in the way of book-larning he'd take
the wind out of a'most anything.'

'Yes,' said I, delighted; 'he knows everything.  He is
astonishingly clever.'

'There's a friend!' murmured Mr. Peggotty, with a grave toss of his
head.

'Nothing seems to cost him any trouble,' said I.  'He knows a task
if he only looks at it.  He is the best cricketer you ever saw.  He
will give you almost as many men as you like at draughts, and beat
you easily.'

Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to say: 'Of
course he will.'

'He is such a speaker,' I pursued, 'that he can win anybody over;
and I don't know what you'd say if you were to hear him sing, Mr.
Peggotty.'

Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to say: 'I have
no doubt of it.'

'Then, he's such a generous, fine, noble fellow,' said I, quite
carried away by my favourite theme, 'that it's hardly possible to
give him as much praise as he deserves.  I am sure I can never feel
thankful enough for the generosity with which he has protected me,
so much younger and lower in the school than himself.'

I was running on, very fast indeed, when my eyes rested on little
Em'ly's face, which was bent forward over the table, listening with
the deepest attention, her breath held, her blue eyes sparkling
like jewels, and the colour mantling in her cheeks.  She looked so
extraordinarily earnest and pretty, that I stopped in a sort of
wonder; and they all observed her at the same time, for as I
stopped, they laughed and looked at her.

'Em'ly is like me,' said Peggotty, 'and would like to see him.'

Em'ly was confused by our all observing her, and hung down her
head, and her face was covered with blushes.  Glancing up presently
through her stray curls, and seeing that we were all looking at her
still (I am sure I, for one, could have looked at her for hours),
she ran away, and kept away till it was nearly bedtime.

I lay down in the old little bed in the stern of the boat, and the
wind came moaning on across the flat as it had done before.  But I
could not help fancying, now, that it moaned of those who were
gone; and instead of thinking that the sea might rise in the night
and float the boat away, I thought of the sea that had risen, since
I last heard those sounds, and drowned my happy home.  I recollect,
as the wind and water began to sound fainter in my ears, putting a
short clause into my prayers, petitioning that I might grow up to
marry little Em'ly, and so dropping lovingly asleep.

The days passed pretty much as they had passed before, except - it
was a great exception- that little Em'ly and I seldom wandered on
the beach now.  She had tasks to learn, and needle-work to do; and
was absent during a great part of each day.  But I felt that we
should not have had those old wanderings, even if it had been
otherwise.  Wild and full of childish whims as Em'ly was, she was
more of a little woman than I had supposed.  She seemed to have got
a great distance away from me, in little more than a year.  She
liked me, but she laughed at me, and tormented me; and when I went
to meet her, stole home another way, and was laughing at the door
when I came back, disappointed.  The best times were when she sat
quietly at work in the doorway, and I sat on the wooden step at her
feet, reading to her.  It seems to me, at this hour, that I have
never seen such sunlight as on those bright April afternoons; that
I have never seen such a sunny little figure as I used to see,
sitting in the doorway of the old boat; that I have never beheld
such sky, such water, such glorified ships sailing away into golden
air.

On the very first evening after our arrival, Mr. Barkis appeared in
an exceedingly vacant and awkward condition, and with a bundle of
oranges tied up in a handkerchief.  As he made no allusion of any
kind to this property, he was supposed to have left it behind him
by accident when he went away; until Ham, running after him to
restore it, came back with the information that it was intended for
Peggotty.  After that occasion he appeared every evening at exactly
the same hour, and always with a little bundle, to which he never
alluded, and which he regularly put behind the door and left there. 
These offerings of affection were of a most various and eccentric
description.  Among them I remember a double set of pigs' trotters,
a huge pin-cushion, half a bushel or so of apples, a pair of jet
earrings, some Spanish onions, a box of dominoes, a canary bird and
cage, and a leg of pickled pork.

Mr. Barkis's wooing, as I remember it, was altogether of a peculiar
kind.  He very seldom said anything; but would sit by the fire in
much the same attitude as he sat in his cart, and stare heavily at
Peggotty, who was opposite.  One night, being, as I suppose,
inspired by love, he made a dart at the bit of wax-candle she kept
for her thread, and put it in his waistcoat-pocket and carried it
off.  After that, his great delight was to produce it when it was
wanted, sticking to the lining of his pocket, in a partially melted
state, and pocket it again when it was done with.  He seemed to
enjoy himself very much, and not to feel at all called upon to
talk.  Even when he took Peggotty out for a walk on the flats, he
had no uneasiness on that head, I believe; contenting himself with
now and then asking her if she was pretty comfortable; and I
remember that sometimes, after he was gone, Peggotty would throw
her apron over her face, and laugh for half-an-hour.  Indeed, we
were all more or less amused, except that miserable Mrs. Gummidge,
whose courtship would appear to have been of an exactly parallel
nature, she was so continually reminded by these transactions of
the old one.

At length, when the term of my visit was nearly expired, it was
given out that Peggotty and Mr. Barkis were going to make a day's
holiday together, and that little Em'ly and I were to accompany
them.  I had but a broken sleep the night before, in anticipation
of the pleasure of a whole day with Em'ly.  We were all astir
betimes in the morning; and while we were yet at breakfast, Mr.
Barkis appeared in the distance, driving a chaise-cart towards the
object of his affections.

Peggotty was dressed as usual, in her neat and quiet mourning; but
Mr. Barkis bloomed in a new blue coat, of which the tailor had
given him such good measure, that the cuffs would have rendered
gloves unnecessary in the coldest weather, while the collar was so
high that it pushed his hair up on end on the top of his head.  His
bright buttons, too, were of the largest size.  Rendered complete
by drab pantaloons and a buff waistcoat, I thought Mr. Barkis a
phenomenon of respectability.

When we were all in a bustle outside the door, I found that Mr.
Peggotty was prepared with an old shoe, which was to be thrown
after us for luck, and which he offered to Mrs. Gummidge for that
purpose.

'No.  It had better be done by somebody else, Dan'l,' said Mrs.
Gummidge.  'I'm a lone lorn creetur' myself, and everythink that
reminds me of creetur's that ain't lone and lorn, goes contrary
with me.'

'Come, old gal!' cried Mr. Peggotty.  'Take and heave it.'

'No, Dan'l,' returned Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her
head.  'If I felt less, I could do more.  You don't feel like me,
Dan'l; thinks don't go contrary with you, nor you with them; you
had better do it yourself.'

But here Peggotty, who had been going about from one to another in
a hurried way, kissing everybody, called out from the cart, in
which we all were by this time (Em'ly and I on two little chairs,
side by side), that Mrs. Gummidge must do it.  So Mrs. Gummidge did
it; and, I am sorry to relate, cast a damp upon the festive
character of our departure, by immediately bursting into tears, and
sinking subdued into the arms of Ham, with the declaration that she
knowed she was a burden, and had better be carried to the House at
once.  Which I really thought was a sensible idea, that Ham might
have acted on.

Away we went, however, on our holiday excursion; and the first
thing we did was to stop at a church, where Mr. Barkis tied the
horse to some rails, and went in with Peggotty, leaving little
Em'ly and me alone in the chaise.  I took that occasion to put my
arm round Em'ly's waist, and propose that as I was going away so
very soon now, we should determine to be very affectionate to one
another, and very happy, all day.  Little Em'ly consenting, and
allowing me to kiss her, I became desperate; informing her, I
recollect, that I never could love another, and that I was prepared
to shed the blood of anybody who should aspire to her affections.

How merry little Em'ly made herself about it!  With what a demure
assumption of being immensely older and wiser than I, the fairy
little woman said I was 'a silly boy'; and then laughed so
charmingly that I forgot the pain of being called by that
disparaging name, in the pleasure of looking at her.

Mr. Barkis and Peggotty were a good while in the church, but came
out at last, and then we drove away into the country.  As we were
going along, Mr. Barkis turned to me, and said, with a wink, - by
the by, I should hardly have thought, before, that he could wink:

'What name was it as I wrote up in the cart?'

'Clara Peggotty,' I answered.

'What name would it be as I should write up now, if there was a
tilt here?'

'Clara Peggotty, again?' I suggested.

'Clara Peggotty BARKIS!' he returned, and burst into a roar of
laughter that shook the chaise.

In a word, they were married, and had gone into the church for no
other purpose.  Peggotty was resolved that it should be quietly
done; and the clerk had given her away, and there had been no
witnesses of the ceremony.  She was a little confused when Mr.
Barkis made this abrupt announcement of their union, and could not
hug me enough in token of her unimpaired affection; but she soon
became herself again, and said she was very glad it was over.

We drove to a little inn in a by-road, where we were expected, and
where we had a very comfortable dinner, and passed the day with
great satisfaction.  If Peggotty had been married every day for the
last ten years, she could hardly have been more at her ease about
it; it made no sort of difference in her: she was just the same as
ever, and went out for a stroll with little Em'ly and me before
tea, while Mr. Barkis philosophically smoked his pipe, and enjoyed
himself, I suppose, with the contemplation of his happiness.  If
so, it sharpened his appetite; for I distinctly call to mind that,
although he had eaten a good deal of pork and greens at dinner, and
had finished off with a fowl or two, he was obliged to have cold
boiled bacon for tea, and disposed of a large quantity without any
emotion.

I have often thought, since, what an odd, innocent, out-of-the-way
kind of wedding it must have been!  We got into the chaise again
soon after dark, and drove cosily back, looking up at the stars,
and talking about them.  I was their chief exponent, and opened Mr.
Barkis's mind to an amazing extent.  I told him all I knew, but he
would have believed anything I might have taken it into my head to
impart to him; for he had a profound veneration for my abilities,
and informed his wife in my hearing, on that very occasion, that I
was 'a young Roeshus' - by which I think he meant prodigy.

When we had exhausted the subject of the stars, or rather when I
had exhausted the mental faculties of Mr. Barkis, little Em'ly and
I made a cloak of an old wrapper, and sat under it for the rest of
the journey.  Ah, how I loved her!  What happiness (I thought) if
we were married, and were going away anywhere to live among the
trees and in the fields, never growing older, never growing wiser,
children ever, rambling hand in hand through sunshine and among
flowery meadows, laying down our heads on moss at night, in a sweet
sleep of purity and peace, and buried by the birds when we were
dead!  Some such picture, with no real world in it, bright with the
light of our innocence, and vague as the stars afar off, was in my
mind all the way.  I am glad to think there were two such guileless
hearts at Peggotty's marriage as little Em'ly's and mine.  I am
glad to think the Loves and Graces took such airy forms in its
homely procession.

Well, we came to the old boat again in good time at night; and
there Mr. and Mrs. Barkis bade us good-bye, and drove away snugly
to their own home.  I felt then, for the first time, that I had
lost Peggotty.  I should have gone to bed with a sore heart indeed
under any other roof but that which sheltered little Em'ly's head.

Mr. Peggotty and Ham knew what was in my thoughts as well as I did,
and were ready with some supper and their hospitable faces to drive
it away.  Little Em'ly came and sat beside me on the locker for the
only time in all that visit; and it was altogether a wonderful
close to a wonderful day.

It was a night tide; and soon after we went to bed, Mr. Peggotty
and Ham went out to fish.  I felt very brave at being left alone in
the solitary house, the protector of Em'ly and Mrs. Gummidge, and
only wished that a lion or a serpent, or any ill-disposed monster,
would make an attack upon us, that I might destroy him, and cover
myself with glory.  But as nothing of the sort happened to be
walking about on Yarmouth flats that night, I provided the best
substitute I could by dreaming of dragons until morning.

With morning came Peggotty; who called to me, as usual, under my
window as if Mr. Barkis the carrier had been from first to last a
dream too.  After breakfast she took me to her own home, and a
beautiful little home it was.  Of all the moveables in it, I must
have been impressed by a certain old bureau of some dark wood in
the parlour (the tile-floored kitchen was the general
sitting-room), with a retreating top which opened, let down, and
became a desk, within which was a large quarto edition of Foxe's
Book of Martyrs.  This precious volume, of which I do not recollect
one word, I immediately discovered and immediately applied myself
to; and I never visited the house afterwards, but I kneeled on a
chair, opened the casket where this gem was enshrined, spread my
arms over the desk, and fell to devouring the book afresh.  I was
chiefly edified, I am afraid, by the pictures, which were numerous,
and represented all kinds of dismal horrors; but the Martyrs and
Peggotty's house have been inseparable in my mind ever since, and
are now.

I took leave of Mr. Peggotty, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge, and
little Em'ly, that day; and passed the night at Peggotty's, in a
little room in the roof (with the Crocodile Book on a shelf by the
bed's head) which was to be always mine, Peggotty said, and should
always be kept for me in exactly the same state.

'Young or old, Davy dear, as long as I am alive and have this house
over my head,' said Peggotty, 'you shall find it as if I expected
you here directly minute.  I shall keep it every day, as I used to
keep your old little room, my darling; and if you was to go to
China, you might think of it as being kept just the same, all the
time you were away.'

I felt the truth and constancy of my dear old nurse, with all my
heart, and thanked her as well as I could.  That was not very well,
for she spoke to me thus, with her arms round my neck, in the
morning, and I was going home in the morning, and I went home in
the morning, with herself and Mr. Barkis in the cart.  They left me
at the gate, not easily or lightly; and it was a strange sight to
me to see the cart go on, taking Peggotty away, and leaving me
under the old elm-trees looking at the house, in which there was no
face to look on mine with love or liking any more.

And now I fell into a state of neglect, which I cannot look back
upon without compassion.  I fell at once into a solitary condition,
- apart from all friendly notice, apart from the society of all
other boys of my own age, apart from all companionship but my own
spiritless thoughts, - which seems to cast its gloom upon this
paper as I write.

What would I have given, to have been sent to the hardest school
that ever was kept! - to have been taught something, anyhow,
anywhere!  No such hope dawned upon me.  They disliked me; and they
sullenly, sternly, steadily, overlooked me.  I think Mr.
Murdstone's means were straitened at about this time; but it is
little to the purpose.  He could not bear me; and in putting me
from him he tried, as I believe, to put away the notion that I had
any claim upon him - and succeeded.

I was not actively ill-used.  I was not beaten, or starved; but the
wrong that was done to me had no intervals of relenting, and was
done in a systematic, passionless manner.  Day after day, week
after week, month after month, I was coldly neglected.  I wonder
sometimes, when I think of it, what they would have done if I had
been taken with an illness; whether I should have lain down in my
lonely room, and languished through it in my usual solitary way, or
whether anybody would have helped me out.

When Mr. and Miss Murdstone were at home, I took my meals with
them; in their absence, I ate and drank by myself.  At all times I
lounged about the house and neighbourhood quite disregarded, except
that they were jealous of my making any friends: thinking, perhaps,
that if I did, I might complain to someone.  For this reason,
though Mr. Chillip often asked me to go and see him (he was a
widower, having, some years before that, lost a little small
light-haired wife, whom I can just remember connecting in my own
thoughts with a pale tortoise-shell cat), it was but seldom that I
enjoyed the happiness of passing an afternoon in his closet of a
surgery; reading some book that was new to me, with the smell of
the whole Pharmacopoeia coming up my nose, or pounding something in
a mortar under his mild directions.

For the same reason, added no doubt to the old dislike of her, I
was seldom allowed to visit Peggotty.  Faithful to her promise, she
either came to see me, or met me somewhere near, once every week,
and never empty-handed; but many and bitter were the
disappointments I had, in being refused permission to pay a visit
to her at her house.  Some few times, however, at long intervals,
I was allowed to go there; and then I found out that Mr. Barkis was
something of a miser, or as Peggotty dutifully expressed it, was 'a
little near', and kept a heap of money in a box under his bed,
which he pretended was only full of coats and trousers.  In this
coffer, his riches hid themselves with such a tenacious modesty,
that the smallest instalments could only be tempted out by
artifice; so that Peggotty had to prepare a long and elaborate
scheme, a very Gunpowder Plot, for every Saturday's expenses.

All this time I was so conscious of the waste of any promise I had
given, and of my being utterly neglected, that I should have been
perfectly miserable, I have no doubt, but for the old books.  They
were my only comfort; and I was as true to them as they were to me,
and read them over and over I don't know how many times more.

I now approach a period of my life, which I can never lose the
remembrance of, while I remember anything: and the recollection of
which has often, without my invocation, come before me like a
ghost, and haunted happier times.

I had been out, one day, loitering somewhere, in the listless,
meditative manner that my way of life engendered, when, turning the
corner of a lane near our house, I came upon Mr. Murdstone walking
with a gentleman.  I was confused, and was going by them, when the
gentleman cried:

'What!  Brooks!'

'No, sir, David Copperfield,' I said.

'Don't tell me.  You are Brooks,' said the gentleman.  'You are
Brooks of Sheffield.  That's your name.'

At these words, I observed the gentleman more attentively.  His
laugh coming to my remembrance too, I knew him to be Mr. Quinion,
whom I had gone over to Lowestoft with Mr. Murdstone to see, before
- it is no matter - I need not recall when.

'And how do you get on, and where are you being educated, Brooks?'
said Mr. Quinion.

He had put his hand upon my shoulder, and turned me about, to walk
with them.  I did not know what to reply, and glanced dubiously at
Mr. Murdstone.

'He is at home at present,' said the latter.  'He is not being
educated anywhere.  I don't know what to do with him.  He is a
difficult subject.'

That old, double look was on me for a moment; and then his eyes
darkened with a frown, as it turned, in its aversion, elsewhere.

'Humph!' said Mr. Quinion, looking at us both, I thought.  'Fine
weather!'

Silence ensued, and I was considering how I could best disengage my
shoulder from his hand, and go away, when he said:

'I suppose you are a pretty sharp fellow still?  Eh, Brooks?'

'Aye!  He is sharp enough,' said Mr. Murdstone, impatiently.  'You
had better let him go.  He will not thank you for troubling him.'

On this hint, Mr. Quinion released me, and I made the best of my
way home.  Looking back as I turned into the front garden, I saw
Mr. Murdstone leaning against the wicket of the churchyard, and Mr.
Quinion talking to him.  They were both looking after me, and I
felt that they were speaking of me.

Mr. Quinion lay at our house that night.  After breakfast, the next
morning, I had put my chair away, and was going out of the room,
when Mr. Murdstone called me back.  He then gravely repaired to
another table, where his sister sat herself at her desk.  Mr.
Quinion, with his hands in his pockets, stood looking out of
window; and I stood looking at them all.

'David,' said Mr. Murdstone, 'to the young this is a world for
action; not for moping and droning in.'  

- 'As you do,' added his sister.

'Jane Murdstone, leave it to me, if you please.  I say, David, to
the young this is a world for action, and not for moping and
droning in.  It is especially so for a young boy of your
disposition, which requires a great deal of correcting; and to
which no greater service can be done than to force it to conform to
the ways of the working world, and to bend it and break it.'

'For stubbornness won't do here,' said his sister 'What it wants
is, to be crushed.  And crushed it must be.  Shall be, too!'

He gave her a look, half in remonstrance, half in approval, and
went on:

'I suppose you know, David, that I am not rich.  At any rate, you
know it now.  You have received some considerable education
already.  Education is costly; and even if it were not, and I could
afford it, I am of opinion that it would not be at all advantageous
to you to be kept at school.  What is before you, is a fight with
the world; and the sooner you begin it, the better.'

I think it occurred to me that I had already begun it, in my poor
way: but it occurs to me now, whether or no.

'You have heard the "counting-house" mentioned sometimes,' said Mr.
Murdstone.

'The counting-house, sir?' I repeated.
'Of Murdstone and Grinby, in the wine trade,' he replied.

I suppose I looked uncertain, for he went on hastily:

'You have heard the "counting-house" mentioned, or the business, or
the cellars, or the wharf, or something about it.'

'I think I have heard the business mentioned, sir,' I said,
remembering what I vaguely knew of his and his sister's resources. 
'But I don't know when.'

'It does not matter when,' he returned.  'Mr. Quinion manages that
business.'

I glanced at the latter deferentially as he stood looking out of
window.

'Mr. Quinion suggests that it gives employment to some other boys,
and that he sees no reason why it shouldn't, on the same terms,
give employment to you.'

'He having,' Mr. Quinion observed in a low voice, and half turning
round, 'no other prospect, Murdstone.'

Mr. Murdstone, with an impatient, even an angry gesture, resumed,
without noticing what he had said:

'Those terms are, that you will earn enough for yourself to provide
for your eating and drinking, and pocket-money.  Your lodging
(which I have arranged for) will be paid by me.  So will your
washing -'

'- Which will be kept down to my estimate,' said his sister.

'Your clothes will be looked after for you, too,' said Mr.
Murdstone; 'as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get them for
yourself.  So you are now going to London, David, with Mr. Quinion,
to begin the world on your own account.'

'In short, you are provided for,' observed his sister; 'and will
please to do your duty.'

Though I quite understood that the purpose of this announcement was
to get rid of me, I have no distinct remembrance whether it pleased
or frightened me.  My impression is, that I was in a state of
confusion about it, and, oscillating between the two points,
touched neither.  Nor had I much time for the clearing of my
thoughts, as Mr. Quinion was to go upon the morrow.

Behold me, on the morrow, in a much-worn little white hat, with a
black crape round it for my mother, a black jacket, and a pair of
hard, stiff corduroy trousers - which Miss Murdstone considered the
best armour for the legs in that fight with the world which was now
to come off.  behold me so attired, and with my little worldly all
before me in a small trunk, sitting, a lone lorn child (as Mrs.
Gummidge might have said), in the post-chaise that was carrying Mr.
Quinion to the London coach at Yarmouth!  See, how our house and
church are lessening in the distance; how the grave beneath the
tree is blotted out by intervening objects; how the spire points
upwards from my old playground no more, and the sky is empty!

CHAPTER 11
I BEGIN LIFE ON MY OWN ACCOUNT, AND DON'T LIKE IT

I know enough of the world now, to have almost lost the capacity of
being much surprised by anything; but it is matter of some surprise
to me, even now, that I can have been so easily thrown away at such
an age.  A child of excellent abilities, and with strong powers of
observation, quick, eager, delicate, and soon hurt bodily or
mentally, it seems wonderful to me that nobody should have made any
sign in my behalf.  But none was made; and I became, at ten years
old, a little labouring hind in the service of Murdstone and
Grinby.

Murdstone and Grinby's warehouse was at the waterside.  It was down
in Blackfriars.  Modern improvements have altered the place; but it
was the last house at the bottom of a narrow street, curving down
hill to the river, with some stairs at the end, where people took
boat.  It was a crazy old house with a wharf of its own, abutting
on the water when the tide was in, and on the mud when the tide was
out, and literally overrun with rats.  Its panelled rooms,
discoloured with the dirt and smoke of a hundred years, I dare say;
its decaying floors and staircase; the squeaking and scuffling of
the old grey rats down in the cellars; and the dirt and rottenness
of the place; are things, not of many years ago, in my mind, but of
the present instant.  They are all before me, just as they were in
the evil hour when I went among them for the first time, with my
trembling hand in Mr. Quinion's.

Murdstone and Grinby's trade was among a good many kinds of people,
but an important branch of it was the supply of wines and spirits
to certain packet ships.  I forget now where they chiefly went, but
I think there were some among them that made voyages both to the
East and West Indies.  I know that a great many empty bottles were
one of the consequences of this traffic, and that certain men and
boys were employed to examine them against the light, and reject
those that were flawed, and to rinse and wash them.  When the empty
bottles ran short, there were labels to be pasted on full ones, or
corks to be fitted to them, or seals to be put upon the corks, or
finished bottles to be packed in casks.  All this work was my work,
and of the boys employed upon it I was one.

There were three or four of us, counting me.  My working place was
established in a corner of the warehouse, where Mr. Quinion could
see me, when he chose to stand up on the bottom rail of his stool
in the counting-house, and look at me through a window above the
desk.  Hither, on the first morning of my so auspiciously beginning
life on my own account, the oldest of the regular boys was summoned
to show me my business.  His name was Mick Walker, and he wore a
ragged apron and a paper cap.  He informed me that his father was
a bargeman, and walked, in a black velvet head-dress, in the Lord
Mayor's Show.  He also informed me that our principal associate
would be another boy whom he introduced by the - to me -
extraordinary name of Mealy Potatoes.  I discovered, however, that
this youth had not been christened by that name, but that it had
been bestowed upon him in the warehouse, on account of his
complexion, which was pale or mealy.  Mealy's father was a
waterman, who had the additional distinction of being a fireman,
and was engaged as such at one of the large theatres; where some
young relation of Mealy's - I think his little sister - did Imps in
the Pantomimes.

No words can express the secret agony of my soul as I sunk into
this companionship; compared these henceforth everyday associates
with those of my happier childhood - not to say with Steerforth,
Traddles, and the rest of those boys; and felt my hopes of growing
up to be a learned and distinguished man, crushed in my bosom.  The
deep remembrance of the sense I had, of being utterly without hope
now; of the shame I felt in my position; of the misery it was to my
young heart to believe that day by day what I had learned, and
thought, and delighted in, and raised my fancy and my emulation up
by, would pass away from me, little by little, never to be brought
back any more; cannot be written.  As often as Mick Walker went
away in the course of that forenoon, I mingled my tears with the
water in which I was washing the bottles; and sobbed as if there
were a flaw in my own breast, and it were in danger of bursting.

The counting-house clock was at half past twelve, and there was
general preparation for going to dinner, when Mr. Quinion tapped at
the counting-house window, and beckoned to me to go in.  I went in,
and found there a stoutish, middle-aged person, in a brown surtout
and black tights and shoes, with no more hair upon his head (which
was a large one, and very shining) than there is upon an egg, and
with a very extensive face, which he turned full upon me.  His
clothes were shabby, but he had an imposing shirt-collar on.  He
carried a jaunty sort of a stick, with a large pair of rusty
tassels to it; and a quizzing-glass hung outside his coat, - for
ornament, I afterwards found, as he very seldom looked through it,
and couldn't see anything when he did.

'This,' said Mr. Quinion, in allusion to myself, 'is he.'

'This,' said the stranger, with a certain condescending roll in his
voice, and a certain indescribable air of doing something genteel,
which impressed me very much, 'is Master Copperfield.  I hope I see
you well, sir?'

I said I was very well, and hoped he was.  I was sufficiently ill
at ease, Heaven knows; but it was not in my nature to complain much
at that time of my life, so I said I was very well, and hoped he
was.

'I am,' said the stranger, 'thank Heaven, quite well.  I have
received a letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he mentions that he
would desire me to receive into an apartment in the rear of my
house, which is at present unoccupied - and is, in short, to be let
as a - in short,' said the stranger, with a smile and in a burst of
confidence, 'as a bedroom - the young beginner whom I have now the
pleasure to -' and the stranger waved his hand, and settled his
chin in his shirt-collar.

'This is Mr. Micawber,' said Mr. Quinion to me.

'Ahem!' said the stranger, 'that is my name.'

'Mr. Micawber,' said Mr. Quinion, 'is known to Mr. Murdstone.  He
takes orders for us on commission, when he can get any.  He has
been written to by Mr. Murdstone, on the subject of your lodgings,
and he will receive you as a lodger.'

'My address,' said Mr. Micawber, 'is Windsor Terrace, City Road. 
I - in short,' said Mr. Micawber, with the same genteel air, and in
another burst of confidence - 'I live there.'

I made him a bow.

'Under the impression,' said Mr. Micawber, 'that your
peregrinations in this metropolis have not as yet been extensive,
and that you might have some difficulty in penetrating the arcana
of the Modern Babylon in the direction of the City Road, - in
short,' said Mr. Micawber, in another burst of confidence, 'that
you might lose yourself - I shall be happy to call this evening,
and install you in the knowledge of the nearest way.'

I thanked him with all my heart, for it was friendly in him to
offer to take that trouble.

'At what hour,' said Mr. Micawber, 'shall I -'

'At about eight,' said Mr. Quinion.

'At about eight,' said Mr. Micawber.  'I beg to wish you good day,
Mr. Quinion.  I will intrude no longer.'

So he put on his hat, and went out with his cane under his arm:
very upright, and humming a tune when he was clear of the
counting-house.

Mr. Quinion then formally engaged me to be as useful as I could in
the warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby, at a salary, I think, of six
shillings a week.  I am not clear whether it was six or seven.  I
am inclined to believe, from my uncertainty on this head, that it
was six at first and seven afterwards.  He paid me a week down
(from his own pocket, I believe), and I gave Mealy sixpence out of
it to get my trunk carried to Windsor Terrace that night: it being
too heavy for my strength, small as it was.  I paid sixpence more
for my dinner, which was a meat pie and a turn at a neighbouring
pump; and passed the hour which was allowed for that meal, in
walking about the streets.

At the appointed time in the evening, Mr. Micawber reappeared.  I
washed my hands and face, to do the greater honour to his
gentility, and we walked to our house, as I suppose I must now call
it, together; Mr. Micawber impressing the name of streets, and the
shapes of corner houses upon me, as we went along, that I might
find my way back, easily, in the morning.

Arrived at this house in Windsor Terrace (which I noticed was
shabby like himself, but also, like himself, made all the show it
could), he presented me to Mrs. Micawber, a thin and faded lady,
not at all young, who was sitting in the parlour (the first floor
was altogether unfurnished, and the blinds were kept down to delude
the neighbours), with a baby at her breast.  This baby was one of
twins; and I may remark here that I hardly ever, in all my
experience of the family, saw both the twins detached from Mrs.
Micawber at the same time.  One of them was always taking
refreshment.

There were two other children; Master Micawber, aged about four,
and Miss Micawber, aged about three.  These, and a
dark-complexioned young woman, with a habit of snorting, who was
servant to the family, and informed me, before half an hour had
expired, that she was 'a Orfling', and came from St. Luke's
workhouse, in the neighbourhood, completed the establishment.  My
room was at the top of the house, at the back: a close chamber;
stencilled all over with an ornament which my young imagination
represented as a blue muffin; and very scantily furnished.

'I never thought,' said Mrs. Micawber, when she came up, twin and
all, to show me the apartment, and sat down to take breath, 'before
I was married, when I lived with papa and mama, that I should ever
find it necessary to take a lodger.  But Mr. Micawber being in
difficulties, all considerations of private feeling must give way.'

I said: 'Yes, ma'am.'

'Mr. Micawber's difficulties are almost overwhelming just at
present,' said Mrs. Micawber; 'and whether it is possible to bring
him through them, I don't know.  When I lived at home with papa and
mama, I really should have hardly understood what the word meant,
in the sense in which I now employ it, but experientia does it, -
as papa used to say.'

I cannot satisfy myself whether she told me that Mr. Micawber had
been an officer in the Marines, or whether I have imagined it.  I
only know that I believe to this hour that he WAS in the Marines
once upon a time, without knowing why.  He was a sort of town
traveller for a number of miscellaneous houses, now; but made
little or nothing of it, I am afraid.

'If Mr. Micawber's creditors will not give him time,' said Mrs.
Micawber, 'they must take the consequences; and the sooner they
bring it to an issue the better.  Blood cannot be obtained from a
stone, neither can anything on account be obtained at present (not
to mention law expenses) from Mr. Micawber.'

I never can quite understand whether my precocious self-dependence
confused Mrs. Micawber in reference to my age, or whether she was
so full of the subject that she would have talked about it to the
very twins if there had been nobody else to communicate with, but
this was the strain in which she began, and she went on accordingly
all the time I knew her.

Poor Mrs. Micawber!  She said she had tried to exert herself, and
so, I have no doubt, she had.  The centre of the street door was
perfectly covered with a great brass-plate, on which was engraved
'Mrs. Micawber's Boarding Establishment for Young Ladies': but I
never found that any young lady had ever been to school there; or
that any young lady ever came, or proposed to come; or that the
least preparation was ever made to receive any young lady.  The
only visitors I ever saw, or heard of, were creditors.  THEY used
to come at all hours, and some of them were quite ferocious.  One
dirty-faced man, I think he was a boot-maker, used to edge himself
into the passage as early as seven o'clock in the morning, and call
up the stairs to Mr. Micawber - 'Come!  You ain't out yet, you
know.  Pay us, will you?  Don't hide, you know; that's mean.  I
wouldn't be mean if I was you.  Pay us, will you?  You just pay us,
d'ye hear?  Come!'  Receiving no answer to these taunts, he would
mount in his wrath to the words 'swindlers' and 'robbers'; and
these being ineffectual too, would sometimes go to the extremity of
crossing the street, and roaring up at the windows of the second
floor, where he knew Mr. Micawber was.  At these times, Mr.
Micawber would be transported with grief and mortification, even to
the length (as I was once made aware by a scream from his wife) of
making motions at himself with a razor; but within half-an-hour
afterwards, he would polish up his shoes with extraordinary pains,
and go out, humming a tune with a greater air of gentility than
ever.  Mrs. Micawber was quite as elastic.  I have known her to be
thrown into fainting fits by the king's taxes at three o'clock, and
to eat lamb chops, breaded, and drink warm ale (paid for with two
tea-spoons that had gone to the pawnbroker's) at four.  On one
occasion, when an execution had just been put in, coming home
through some chance as early as six o'clock, I saw her lying (of
course with a twin) under the grate in a swoon, with her hair all
torn about her face; but I never knew her more cheerful than she
was, that very same night, over a veal cutlet before the kitchen
fire, telling me stories about her papa and mama, and the company
they used to keep.

In this house, and with this family, I passed my leisure time.  My
own exclusive breakfast of a penny loaf and a pennyworth of milk,
I provided myself.  I kept another small loaf, and a modicum of
cheese, on a particular shelf of a particular cupboard, to make my
supper on when I came back at night.  This made a hole in the six
or seven shillings, I know well; and I was out at the warehouse all
day, and had to support myself on that money all the week.  From
Monday morning until Saturday night, I had no advice, no counsel,
no encouragement, no consolation, no assistance, no support, of any
kind, from anyone, that I can call to mind, as I hope to go to
heaven!

I was so young and childish, and so little qualified - how could I
be otherwise? - to undertake the whole charge of my own existence,
that often, in going to Murdstone and Grinby's, of a morning, I
could not resist the stale pastry put out for sale at half-price at
the pastrycooks' doors, and spent in that the money I should have
kept for my dinner.  Then, I went without my dinner, or bought a
roll or a slice of pudding.  I remember two pudding shops, between
which I was divided, according to my finances.  One was in a court
close to St. Martin's Church - at the back of the church, - which
is now removed altogether.  The pudding at that shop was made of
currants, and was rather a special pudding, but was dear,
twopennyworth not being larger than a pennyworth of more ordinary
pudding.  A good shop for the latter was in the Strand - somewhere
in that part which has been rebuilt since.  It was a stout pale
pudding, heavy and flabby, and with great flat raisins in it, stuck
in whole at wide distances apart.  It came up hot at about my time
every day, and many a day did I dine off it.  When I dined
regularly and handsomely, I had a saveloy and a penny loaf, or a
fourpenny plate of red beef from a cook's shop; or a plate of bread
and cheese and a glass of beer, from a miserable old public-house
opposite our place of business, called the Lion, or the Lion and
something else that I have forgotten.  Once, I remember carrying my
own bread (which I had brought from home in the morning) under my
arm, wrapped in a piece of paper, like a book, and going to a
famous alamode beef-house near Drury Lane, and ordering a 'small
plate' of that delicacy to eat with it.  What the waiter thought of
such a strange little apparition coming in all alone, I don't know;
but I can see him now, staring at me as I ate my dinner, and
bringing up the other waiter to look.  I gave him a halfpenny for
himself, and I wish he hadn't taken it.

We had half-an-hour, I think, for tea.  When I had money enough, I
used to get half-a-pint of ready-made coffee and a slice of bread
and butter.  When I had none, I used to look at a venison shop in
Fleet Street; or I have strolled, at such a time, as far as Covent
Garden Market, and stared at the pineapples.  I was fond of
wandering about the Adelphi, because it was a mysterious place,
with those dark arches.  I see myself emerging one evening from
some of these arches, on a little public-house close to the river,
with an open space before it, where some coal-heavers were dancing;
to look at whom I sat down upon a bench.  I wonder what they
thought of me!

I was such a child, and so little, that frequently when I went into
the bar of a strange public-house for a glass of ale or porter, to
moisten what I had had for dinner, they were afraid to give it me. 
I remember one hot evening I went into the bar of a public-house,
and said to the landlord:
'What is your best - your very best - ale a glass?'  For it was a
special occasion.  I don't know what.  It may have been my
birthday.

'Twopence-halfpenny,' says the landlord, 'is the price of the
Genuine Stunning ale.'

'Then,' says I, producing the money, 'just draw me a glass of the
Genuine Stunning, if you please, with a good head to it.'

The landlord looked at me in return over the bar, from head to
foot, with a strange smile on his face; and instead of drawing the
beer, looked round the screen and said something to his wife.  She
came out from behind it, with her work in her hand, and joined him
in surveying me.  Here we stand, all three, before me now.  The
landlord in his shirt-sleeves, leaning against the bar
window-frame; his wife looking over the little half-door; and I, in
some confusion, looking up at them from outside the partition. 
They asked me a good many questions; as, what my name was, how old
I was, where I lived, how I was employed, and how I came there.  To
all of which, that I might commit nobody, I invented, I am afraid,
appropriate answers.  They served me with the ale, though I suspect
it was not the Genuine Stunning; and the landlord's wife, opening
the little half-door of the bar, and bending down, gave me my money
back, and gave me a kiss that was half admiring and half
compassionate, but all womanly and good, I am sure.

I know I do not exaggerate, unconsciously and unintentionally, the
scantiness of my resources or the difficulties of my life.  I know
that if a shilling were given me by Mr. Quinion at any time, I
spent it in a dinner or a tea.  I know that I worked, from morning
until night, with common men and boys, a shabby child.  I know that
I lounged about the streets, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily
fed.  I know that, but for the mercy of God, I might easily have
been, for any care that was taken of me, a little robber or a
little vagabond.

Yet I held some station at Murdstone and Grinby's too.  Besides
that Mr. Quinion did what a careless man so occupied, and dealing
with a thing so anomalous, could, to treat me as one upon a
different footing from the rest, I never said, to man or boy, how
it was that I came to be there, or gave the least indication of
being sorry that I was there.  That I suffered in secret, and that
I suffered exquisitely, no one ever knew but I.  How much I
suffered, it is, as I have said already, utterly beyond my power to
tell.  But I kept my own counsel, and I did my work.  I knew from
the first, that, if I could not do my work as well as any of the
rest, I could not hold myself above slight and contempt.  I soon
became at least as expeditious and as skilful as either of the
other boys.  Though perfectly familiar with them, my conduct and
manner were different enough from theirs to place a space between
us.  They and the men generally spoke of me as 'the little gent',
or 'the young Suffolker.'  A certain man named Gregory, who was
foreman of the packers, and another named Tipp, who was the carman,
and wore a red jacket, used to address me sometimes as 'David': but
I think it was mostly when we were very confidential, and when I
had made some efforts to entertain them, over our work, with some
results of the old readings; which were fast perishing out of my
remembrance.  Mealy Potatoes uprose once, and rebelled against my
being so distinguished; but Mick Walker settled him in no time.

My rescue from this kind of existence I considered quite hopeless,
and abandoned, as such, altogether.  I am solemnly convinced that
I never for one hour was reconciled to it, or was otherwise than
miserably unhappy; but I bore it; and even to Peggotty, partly for
the love of her and partly for shame, never in any letter (though
many passed between us) revealed the truth.

Mr. Micawber's difficulties were an addition to the distressed
state of my mind.  In my forlorn state I became quite attached to
the family, and used to walk about, busy with Mrs. Micawber's
calculations of ways and means, and heavy with the weight of Mr.
Micawber's debts.  On a Saturday night, which was my grand treat,
- partly because it was a great thing to walk home with six or
seven shillings in my pocket, looking into the shops and thinking
what such a sum would buy, and partly because I went home early, -
Mrs. Micawber would make the most heart-rending confidences to me;
also on a Sunday morning, when I mixed the portion of tea or coffee
I had bought over-night, in a little shaving-pot, and sat late at
my breakfast.  It was nothing at all unusual for Mr. Micawber to
sob violently at the beginning of one of these Saturday night
conversations, and sing about jack's delight being his lovely Nan,
towards the end of it.  I have known him come home to supper with
a flood of tears, and a declaration that nothing was now left but
a jail; and go to bed making a calculation of the expense of
putting bow-windows to the house, 'in case anything turned up',
which was his favourite expression.  And Mrs. Micawber was just the
same.

A curious equality of friendship, originating, I suppose, in our
respective circumstances, sprung up between me and these people,
notwithstanding the ludicrous disparity in our years.  But I never
allowed myself to be prevailed upon to accept any invitation to eat
and drink with them out of their stock (knowing that they got on
badly with the butcher and baker, and had often not too much for
themselves), until Mrs. Micawber took me into her entire
confidence.  This she did one evening as follows:

'Master Copperfield,' said Mrs. Micawber, 'I make no stranger of
you, and therefore do not hesitate to say that Mr. Micawber's
difficulties are coming to a crisis.'

It made me very miserable to hear it, and I looked at Mrs.
Micawber's red eyes with the utmost sympathy.

'With the exception of the heel of a Dutch cheese - which is not
adapted to the wants of a young family' - said Mrs. Micawber,
'there is really not a scrap of anything in the larder.  I was
accustomed to speak of the larder when I lived with papa and mama,
and I use the word almost unconsciously.  What I mean to express
is, that there is nothing to eat in the house.'

'Dear me!' I said, in great concern.

I had two or three shillings of my week's money in my pocket - from
which I presume that it must have been on a Wednesday night when we
held this conversation - and I hastily produced them, and with
heartfelt emotion begged Mrs. Micawber to accept of them as a loan. 
But that lady, kissing me, and making me put them back in my
pocket, replied that she couldn't think of it.

'No, my dear Master Copperfield,' said she, 'far be it from my
thoughts!  But you have a discretion beyond your years, and can
render me another kind of service, if you will; and a service I
will thankfully accept of.'

I begged Mrs. Micawber to name it.

'I have parted with the plate myself,' said Mrs. Micawber.  'Six
tea, two salt, and a pair of sugars, I have at different times
borrowed money on, in secret, with my own hands.  But the twins are
a great tie; and to me, with my recollections, of papa and mama,
these transactions are very painful.  There are still a few trifles
that we could part with.  Mr. Micawber's feelings would never allow
him to dispose of them; and Clickett' - this was the girl from the
workhouse - 'being of a vulgar mind, would take painful liberties
if so much confidence was reposed in her.  Master Copperfield, if
I might ask you -'

I understood Mrs. Micawber now, and begged her to make use of me to
any extent.  I began to dispose of the more portable articles of
property that very evening; and went out on a similar expedition
almost every morning, before I went to Murdstone and Grinby's.

Mr. Micawber had a few books on a little chiffonier, which he
called the library; and those went first.  I carried them, one
after another, to a bookstall in the City Road - one part of which,
near our house, was almost all bookstalls and bird shops then - and
sold them for whatever they would bring.  The keeper of this
bookstall, who lived in a little house behind it, used to get tipsy
every night, and to be violently scolded by his wife every morning. 
More than once, when I went there early, I had audience of him in
a turn-up bedstead, with a cut in his forehead or a black eye,
bearing witness to his excesses over-night (I am afraid he was
quarrelsome in his drink), and he, with a shaking hand,
endeavouring to find the needful shillings in one or other of the
pockets of his clothes, which lay upon the floor, while his wife,
with a baby in her arms and her shoes down at heel, never left off
rating him.  Sometimes he had lost his money, and then he would ask
me to call again; but his wife had always got some - had taken his,
I dare say, while he was drunk - and secretly completed the bargain
on the stairs, as we went down together.
At the pawnbroker's shop, too, I began to be very well known.  The
principal gentleman who officiated behind the counter, took a good
deal of notice of me; and often got me, I recollect, to decline a
Latin noun or adjective, or to conjugate a Latin verb, in his ear,
while he transacted my business.  After all these occasions Mrs.
Micawber made a little treat, which was generally a supper; and
there was a peculiar relish in these meals which I well remember.

At last Mr. Micawber's difficulties came to a crisis, and he was
arrested early one morning, and carried over to the King's Bench
Prison in the Borough.  He told me, as he went out of the house,
that the God of day had now gone down upon him - and I really
thought his heart was broken and mine too.  But I heard,
afterwards, that he was seen to play a lively game at skittles,
before noon.

On the first Sunday after he was taken there, I was to go and see
him, and have dinner with him.  I was to ask my way to such a
place, and just short of that place I should see such another
place, and just short of that I should see a yard, which I was to
cross, and keep straight on until I saw a turnkey.  All this I did;
and when at last I did see a turnkey (poor little fellow that I
was!), and thought how, when Roderick Random was in a debtors'
prison, there was a man there with nothing on him but an old rug,
the turnkey swam before my dimmed eyes and my beating heart.

Mr. Micawber was waiting for me within the gate, and we went up to
his room (top story but one), and cried very much.  He solemnly
conjured me, I remember, to take warning by his fate; and to
observe that if a man had twenty pounds a-year for his income, and
spent nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence, he would be
happy, but that if he spent twenty pounds one he would be
miserable.  After which he borrowed a shilling of me for porter,
gave me a written order on Mrs. Micawber for the amount, and put
away his pocket-handkerchief, and cheered up.

We sat before a little fire, with two bricks put within the rusted
grate, one on each side, to prevent its burning too many coals;
until another debtor, who shared the room with Mr. Micawber, came
in from the bakehouse with the loin of mutton which was our
joint-stock repast.  Then I was sent up to 'Captain Hopkins' in the
room overhead, with Mr. Micawber's compliments, and I was his young
friend, and would Captain Hopkins lend me a knife and fork.

Captain Hopkins lent me the knife and fork, with his compliments to
Mr. Micawber.  There was a very dirty lady in his little room, and
two wan girls, his daughters, with shock heads of hair.  I thought
it was better to borrow Captain Hopkins's knife and fork, than
Captain Hopkins's comb.  The Captain himself was in the last
extremity of shabbiness, with large whiskers, and an old, old brown
great-coat with no other coat below it.  I saw his bed rolled up in
a corner; and what plates and dishes and pots he had, on a shelf;
and I divined (God knows how) that though the two girls with the
shock heads of hair were Captain Hopkins's children, the dirty lady
was not married to Captain Hopkins.  My timid station on his
threshold was not occupied more than a couple of minutes at most;
but I came down again with all this in my knowledge, as surely as
the knife and fork were in my hand.

There was something gipsy-like and agreeable in the dinner, after
all.  I took back Captain Hopkins's knife and fork early in the
afternoon, and went home to comfort Mrs. Micawber with an account
of my visit.  She fainted when she saw me return, and made a little
jug of egg-hot afterwards to console us while we talked it over.

I don't know how the household furniture came to be sold for the
family benefit, or who sold it, except that I did not.  Sold it
was, however, and carried away in a van; except the bed, a few
chairs, and the kitchen table.  With these possessions we encamped,
as it were, in the two parlours of the emptied house in Windsor
Terrace; Mrs. Micawber, the children, the Orfling, and myself; and
lived in those rooms night and day.  I have no idea for how long,
though it seems to me for a long time.  At last Mrs. Micawber
resolved to move into the prison, where Mr. Micawber had now
secured a room to himself.  So I took the key of the house to the
landlord, who was very glad to get it; and the beds were sent over
to the King's Bench, except mine, for which a little room was hired
outside the walls in the neighbourhood of that Institution, very
much to my satisfaction, since the Micawbers and I had become too
used to one another, in our troubles, to part.  The Orfling was
likewise accommodated with an inexpensive lodging in the same
neighbourhood.  Mine was a quiet back-garret with a sloping roof,
commanding a pleasant prospect of a timberyard; and when I took
possession of it, with the reflection that Mr. Micawber's troubles
had come to a crisis at last, I thought it quite a paradise.

All this time I was working at Murdstone and Grinby's in the same
common way, and with the same common companions, and with the same
sense of unmerited degradation as at first.  But I never, happily
for me no doubt, made a single acquaintance, or spoke to any of the
many boys whom I saw daily in going to the warehouse, in coming
from it, and in prowling about the streets at meal-times.  I led
the same secretly unhappy life; but I led it in the same lonely,
self-reliant manner.  The only changes I am conscious of are,
firstly, that I had grown more shabby, and secondly, that I was now
relieved of much of the weight of Mr. and Mrs. Micawber's cares;
for some relatives or friends had engaged to help them at their
present pass, and they lived more comfortably in the prison than
they had lived for a long while out of it.  I used to breakfast
with them now, in virtue of some arrangement, of which I have
forgotten the details.  I forget, too, at what hour the gates were
opened in the morning, admitting of my going in; but I know that I
was often up at six o'clock, and that my favourite lounging-place
in the interval was old London Bridge, where I was wont to sit in
one of the stone recesses, watching the people going by, or to look
over the balustrades at the sun shining in the water, and lighting
up the golden flame on the top of the Monument.  The Orfling met me
here sometimes, to be told some astonishing fictions respecting the
wharves and the Tower; of which I can say no more than that I hope
I believed them myself.  In the evening I used to go back to the
prison, and walk up and down the parade with Mr. Micawber; or play
casino with Mrs. Micawber, and hear reminiscences of her papa and
mama.  Whether Mr. Murdstone knew where I was, I am unable to say. 
I never told them at Murdstone and Grinby's.

Mr. Micawber's affairs, although past their crisis, were very much
involved by reason of a certain 'Deed', of which I used to hear a
great deal, and which I suppose, now, to have been some former
composition with his creditors, though I was so far from being
clear about it then, that I am conscious of having confounded it
with those demoniacal parchments which are held to have, once upon
a time, obtained to a great extent in Germany.  At last this
document appeared to be got out of the way, somehow; at all events
it ceased to be the rock-ahead it had been; and Mrs. Micawber
informed me that 'her family' had decided that Mr. Micawber should
apply for his release under the Insolvent Debtors Act, which would
set him free, she expected, in about six weeks.

'And then,' said Mr. Micawber, who was present, 'I have no doubt I
shall, please Heaven, begin to be beforehand with the world, and to
live in a perfectly new manner, if - in short, if anything turns
up.'

By way of going in for anything that might be on the cards, I call
to mind that Mr. Micawber, about this time, composed a petition to
the House of Commons, praying for an alteration in the law of
imprisonment for debt.  I set down this remembrance here, because
it is an instance to myself of the manner in which I fitted my old
books to my altered life, and made stories for myself, out of the
streets, and out of men and women; and how some main points in the
character I shall unconsciously develop, I suppose, in writing my
life, were gradually forming all this while.

There was a club in the prison, in which Mr. Micawber, as a
gentleman, was a great authority.  Mr. Micawber had stated his idea
of this petition to the club, and the club had strongly approved of
the same.  Wherefore Mr. Micawber (who was a thoroughly
good-natured man, and as active a creature about everything but his
own affairs as ever existed, and never so happy as when he was busy
about something that could never be of any profit to him) set to
work at the petition, invented it, engrossed it on an immense sheet
of paper, spread it out on a table, and appointed a time for all
the club, and all within the walls if they chose, to come up to his
room and sign it.

When I heard of this approaching ceremony, I was so anxious to see
them all come in, one after another, though I knew the greater part
of them already, and they me, that I got an hour's leave of absence
from Murdstone and Grinby's, and established myself in a corner for
that purpose.  As many of the principal members of the club as
could be got into the small room without filling it, supported Mr.
Micawber in front of the petition, while my old friend Captain
Hopkins (who had washed himself, to do honour to so solemn an
occasion) stationed himself close to it, to read it to all who were
unacquainted with its contents.  The door was then thrown open, and
the general population began to come in, in a long file: several
waiting outside, while one entered, affixed his signature, and went
out.  To everybody in succession, Captain Hopkins said: 'Have you
read it?' - 'No.'  - 'Would you like to hear it read?'  If he
weakly showed the least disposition to hear it, Captain Hopkins, in
a loud sonorous voice, gave him every word of it.  The Captain
would have read it twenty thousand times, if twenty thousand people
would have heard him, one by one.  I remember a certain luscious
roll he gave to such phrases as 'The people's representatives in
Parliament assembled,' 'Your petitioners therefore humbly approach
your honourable house,' 'His gracious Majesty's unfortunate
subjects,' as if the words were something real in his mouth, and
delicious to taste; Mr. Micawber, meanwhile, listening with a
little of an author's vanity, and contemplating (not severely) the
spikes on the opposite wall.

As I walked to and fro daily between Southwark and Blackfriars, and
lounged about at meal-times in obscure streets, the stones of which
may, for anything I know, be worn at this moment by my childish
feet, I wonder how many of these people were wanting in the crowd
that used to come filing before me in review again, to the echo of
Captain Hopkins's voice!  When my thoughts go back, now, to that
slow agony of my youth, I wonder how much of the histories I
invented for such people hangs like a mist of fancy over
well-remembered facts!  When I tread the old ground, I do not
wonder that I seem to see and pity, going on before me, an innocent
romantic boy, making his imaginative world out of such strange
experiences and sordid things!

CHAPTER 12
LIKING LIFE ON MY OWN ACCOUNT NO BETTER,
     I FORM A GREAT RESOLUTION

In due time, Mr. Micawber's petition was ripe for hearing; and that
gentleman was ordered to be discharged under the Act, to my great
joy.  His creditors were not implacable; and Mrs. Micawber informed
me that even the revengeful boot-maker had declared in open court
that he bore him no malice, but that when money was owing to him he
liked to be paid.  He said he thought it was human nature.

M r Micawber returned to the King's Bench when his case was over,
as some fees were to be settled, and some formalities observed,
before he could be actually released.  The club received him with
transport, and held an harmonic meeting that evening in his honour;
while Mrs. Micawber and I had a lamb's fry in private, surrounded
by the sleeping family.

'On such an occasion I will give you, Master Copperfield,' said
Mrs. Micawber, 'in a little more flip,' for we had been having some
already, 'the memory of my papa and mama.'

'Are they dead, ma'am?' I inquired, after drinking the toast in a
wine-glass.

'My mama departed this life,' said Mrs. Micawber, 'before Mr.
Micawber's difficulties commenced, or at least before they became
pressing.  My papa lived to bail Mr. Micawber several times, and
then expired, regretted by a numerous circle.'

Mrs. Micawber shook her head, and dropped a pious tear upon the
twin who happened to be in hand.

As I could hardly hope for a more favourable opportunity of putting
a question in which I had a near interest, I said to Mrs. Micawber:

'May I ask, ma'am, what you and Mr. Micawber intend to do, now that
Mr. Micawber is out of his difficulties, and at liberty?  Have you
settled yet?'

'My family,' said Mrs. Micawber, who always said those two words
with an air, though I never could discover who came under the
denomination, 'my family are of opinion that Mr. Micawber should
quit London, and exert his talents in the country.  Mr. Micawber is
a man of great talent, Master Copperfield.'

I said I was sure of that.

'Of great talent,' repeated Mrs. Micawber.  'My family are of
opinion, that, with a little interest, something might be done for
a man of his ability in the Custom House.  The influence of my
family being local, it is their wish that Mr. Micawber should go
down to Plymouth.  They think it indispensable that he should be
upon the spot.'

'That he may be ready?' I suggested.

'Exactly,' returned Mrs. Micawber.  'That he may be ready - in case
of anything turning up.'

'And do you go too, ma'am?'

The events of the day, in combination with the twins, if not with
the flip, had made Mrs. Micawber hysterical, and she shed tears as
she replied:

'I never will desert Mr. Micawber.  Mr. Micawber may have concealed
his difficulties from me in the first instance, but his sanguine
temper may have led him to expect that he would overcome them.  The
pearl necklace and bracelets which I inherited from mama, have been
disposed of for less than half their value; and the set of coral,
which was the wedding gift of my papa, has been actually thrown
away for nothing.  But I never will desert Mr. Micawber.  No!'
cried Mrs. Micawber, more affected than before, 'I never will do
it!  It's of no use asking me!'

I felt quite uncomfortable - as if Mrs. Micawber supposed I had
asked her to do anything of the sort! - and sat looking at her in
alarm.

'Mr. Micawber has his faults.  I do not deny that he is
improvident.  I do not deny that he has kept me in the dark as to
his resources and his liabilities both,' she went on, looking at
the wall; 'but I never will desert Mr. Micawber!'

Mrs. Micawber having now raised her voice into a perfect scream, I
was so frightened that I ran off to the club-room, and disturbed
Mr. Micawber in the act of presiding at a long table, and leading
the chorus of

     Gee up, Dobbin,
     Gee ho, Dobbin,
     Gee up, Dobbin,
     Gee up, and gee ho - o - o!

with the tidings that Mrs. Micawber was in an alarming state, upon
which he immediately burst into tears, and came away with me with
his waistcoat full of the heads and tails of shrimps, of which he
had been partaking.

'Emma, my angel!' cried Mr. Micawber, running into the room; 'what
is the matter?'

'I never will desert you, Micawber!' she exclaimed.

'My life!' said Mr. Micawber, taking her in his arms.  'I am
perfectly aware of it.'

'He is the parent of my children!  He is the father of my twins!
He is the husband of my affections,' cried Mrs. Micawber,
struggling; 'and I ne - ver - will - desert Mr. Micawber!'

Mr. Micawber was so deeply affected by this proof of her devotion
(as to me, I was dissolved in tears), that he hung over her in a
passionate manner, imploring her to look up, and to be calm.  But
the more he asked Mrs. Micawber to look up, the more she fixed her
eyes on nothing; and the more he asked her to compose herself, the
more she wouldn't.  Consequently Mr. Micawber was soon so overcome,
that he mingled his tears with hers and mine; until he begged me to
do him the favour of taking a chair on the staircase, while he got
her into bed.  I would have taken my leave for the night, but he
would not hear of my doing that until the strangers' bell should
ring.  So I sat at the staircase window, until he came out with
another chair and joined me.

'How is Mrs. Micawber now, sir?' I said.

'Very low,' said Mr. Micawber, shaking his head; 'reaction.  Ah,
this has been a dreadful day!  We stand alone now - everything is
gone from us!'

Mr. Micawber pressed my hand, and groaned, and afterwards shed
tears.  I was greatly touched, and disappointed too, for I had
expected that we should be quite gay on this happy and
long-looked-for occasion.  But Mr. and Mrs. Micawber were so used
to their old difficulties, I think, that they felt quite
shipwrecked when they came to consider that they were released from
them.  All their elasticity was departed, and I never saw them half
so wretched as on this night; insomuch that when the bell rang, and
Mr. Micawber walked with me to the lodge, and parted from me there
with a blessing, I felt quite afraid to leave him by himself, he
was so profoundly miserable.

But through all the confusion and lowness of spirits in which we
had been, so unexpectedly to me, involved, I plainly discerned that
Mr. and Mrs. Micawber and their family were going away from London,
and that a parting between us was near at hand.  It was in my walk
home that night, and in the sleepless hours which followed when I
lay in bed, that the thought first occurred to me - though I don't
know how it came into my head - which afterwards shaped itself into
a settled resolution.

I had grown to be so accustomed to the Micawbers, and had been so
intimate with them in their distresses, and was so utterly
friendless without them, that the prospect of being thrown upon
some new shift for a lodging, and going once more among unknown
people, was like being that moment turned adrift into my present
life, with such a knowledge of it ready made as experience had
given me.  All the sensitive feelings it wounded so cruelly, all
the shame and misery it kept alive within my breast, became more
poignant as I thought of this; and I determined that the life was
unendurable.

That there was no hope of escape from it, unless the escape was my
own act, I knew quite well.  I rarely heard from Miss Murdstone,
and never from Mr. Murdstone: but two or three parcels of made or
mended clothes had come up for me, consigned to Mr. Quinion, and in
each there was a scrap of paper to the effect that J. M. trusted D.
C. was applying himself to business, and devoting himself wholly to
his duties - not the least hint of my ever being anything else than
the common drudge into which I was fast settling down.

The very next day showed me, while my mind was in the first
agitation of what it had conceived, that Mrs. Micawber had not
spoken of their going away without warrant.  They took a lodging in
the house where I lived, for a week; at the expiration of which
time they were to start for Plymouth.  Mr. Micawber himself came
down to the counting-house, in the afternoon, to tell Mr. Quinion
that he must relinquish me on the day of his departure, and to give
me a high character, which I am sure I deserved.  And Mr. Quinion,
calling in Tipp the carman, who was a married man, and had a room
to let, quartered me prospectively on him - by our mutual consent,
as he had every reason to think; for I said nothing, though my
resolution was now taken.

I passed my evenings with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, during the
remaining term of our residence under the same roof; and I think we
became fonder of one another as the time went on.  On the last
Sunday, they invited me to dinner; and we had a loin of pork and
apple sauce, and a pudding.  I had bought a spotted wooden horse
over-night as a parting gift to little Wilkins Micawber - that was
the boy - and a doll for little Emma.  I had also bestowed a
shilling on the Orfling, who was about to be disbanded.

We had a very pleasant day, though we were all in a tender state
about our approaching separation.

'I shall never, Master Copperfield,' said Mrs. Micawber, 'revert to
the period when Mr. Micawber was in difficulties, without thinking
of you.  Your conduct has always been of the most delicate and
obliging description.  You have never been a lodger.  You have been
a friend.'

'My dear,' said Mr. Micawber; 'Copperfield,' for so he had been
accustomed to call me, of late, 'has a heart to feel for the
distresses of his fellow-creatures when they are behind a cloud,
and a head to plan, and a hand to - in short, a general ability to
dispose of such available property as could be made away with.'

I expressed my sense of this commendation, and said I was very
sorry we were going to lose one another.

'My dear young friend,' said Mr. Micawber, 'I am older than you; a
man of some experience in life, and - and of some experience, in
short, in difficulties, generally speaking.  At present, and until
something turns up (which I am, I may say, hourly expecting), I
have nothing to bestow but advice.  Still my advice is so far worth
taking, that - in short, that I have never taken it myself, and am
the' - here Mr. Micawber, who had been beaming and smiling, all
over his head and face, up to the present moment, checked himself
and frowned - 'the miserable wretch you behold.'

'My dear Micawber!' urged his wife.

'I say,' returned Mr. Micawber, quite forgetting himself, and
smiling again, 'the miserable wretch you behold.  My advice is,
never do tomorrow what you can do today.  Procrastination is the
thief of time.  Collar him!'

'My poor papa's maxim,' Mrs. Micawber observed.

'My dear,' said Mr. Micawber, 'your papa was very well in his way,
and Heaven forbid that I should disparage him.  Take him for all in
all, we ne'er shall - in short, make the acquaintance, probably, of
anybody else possessing, at his time of life, the same legs for
gaiters, and able to read the same description of print, without
spectacles.  But he applied that maxim to our marriage, my dear;
and that was so far prematurely entered into, in consequence, that
I never recovered the expense.'  Mr. Micawber looked aside at Mrs.
Micawber, and added: 'Not that I am sorry for it.  Quite the
contrary, my love.'  After which, he was grave for a minute or so.

'My other piece of advice, Copperfield,' said Mr. Micawber, 'you
know.  Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen
nineteen and six, result happiness.  Annual income twenty pounds,
annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six, result misery.  The
blossom is blighted, the leaf is withered, the god of day goes down
upon the dreary scene, and - and in short you are for ever floored. 
As I am!'

To make his example the more impressive, Mr. Micawber drank a glass
of punch with an air of great enjoyment and satisfaction, and
whistled the College Hornpipe.

I did not fail to assure him that I would store these precepts in
my mind, though indeed I had no need to do so, for, at the time,
they affected me visibly.  Next morning I met the whole family at
the coach office, and saw them, with a desolate heart, take their
places outside, at the back.

'Master Copperfield,' said Mrs. Micawber, 'God bless you!  I never
can forget all that, you know, and I never would if I could.'

'Copperfield,' said Mr. Micawber, 'farewell!  Every happiness and
prosperity!  If, in the progress of revolving years, I could
persuade myself that my blighted destiny had been a warning to you,
I should feel that I had not occupied another man's place in
existence altogether in vain.  In case of anything turning up (of
which I am rather confident), I shall be extremely happy if it
should be in my power to improve your prospects.'

I think, as Mrs. Micawber sat at the back of the coach, with the
children, and I stood in the road looking wistfully at them, a mist
cleared from her eyes, and she saw what a little creature I really
was.  I think so, because she beckoned to me to climb up, with
quite a new and motherly expression in her face, and put her arm
round my neck, and gave me just such a kiss as she might have given
to her own boy.  I had barely time to get down again before the
coach started, and I could hardly see the family for the
handkerchiefs they waved.  It was gone in a minute.  The Orfling
and I stood looking vacantly at each other in the middle of the
road, and then shook hands and said good-bye; she going back, I
suppose, to St. Luke's workhouse, as I went to begin my weary day
at Murdstone and Grinby's.

But with no intention of passing many more weary days there.  No. 
I had resolved to run away.  - To go, by some means or other, down
into the country, to the only relation I had in the world, and tell
my story to my aunt, Miss Betsey.
I have already observed that I don't know how this desperate idea
came into my brain.  But, once there, it remained there; and
hardened into a purpose than which I have never entertained a more
determined purpose in my life.  I am far from sure that I believed
there was anything hopeful in it, but my mind was thoroughly made
up that it must be carried into execution.

Again, and again, and a hundred times again, since the night when
the thought had first occurred to me and banished sleep, I had gone
over that old story of my poor mother's about my birth, which it
had been one of my great delights in the old time to hear her tell,
and which I knew by heart.  My aunt walked into that story, and
walked out of it, a dread and awful personage; but there was one
little trait in her behaviour which I liked to dwell on, and which
gave me some faint shadow of encouragement.  I could not forget how
my mother had thought that she felt her touch her pretty hair with
no ungentle hand; and though it might have been altogether my
mother's fancy, and might have had no foundation whatever in fact,
I made a little picture, out of it, of my terrible aunt relenting
towards the girlish beauty that I recollected so well and loved so
much, which softened the whole narrative.  It is very possible that
it had been in my mind a long time, and had gradually engendered my
determination.

As I did not even know where Miss Betsey lived, I wrote a long
letter to Peggotty, and asked her, incidentally, if she remembered;
pretending that I had heard of such a lady living at a certain
place I named at random, and had a curiosity to know if it were the
same.  In the course of that letter, I told Peggotty that I had a
particular occasion for half a guinea; and that if she could lend
me that sum until I could repay it, I should be very much obliged
to her, and would tell her afterwards what I had wanted it for.

Peggotty's answer soon arrived, and was, as usual, full of
affectionate devotion.  She enclosed the half guinea (I was afraid
she must have had a world of trouble to get it out of Mr. Barkis's
box), and told me that Miss Betsey lived near Dover, but whether at
Dover itself, at Hythe, Sandgate, or Folkestone, she could not say. 
One of our men, however, informing me on my asking him about these
places, that they were all close together, I deemed this enough for
my object, and resolved to set out at the end of that week.

Being a very honest little creature, and unwilling to disgrace the
memory I was going to leave behind me at Murdstone and Grinby's, I
considered myself bound to remain until Saturday night; and, as I
had been paid a week's wages in advance when I first came there,
not to present myself in the counting-house at the usual hour, to
receive my stipend.  For this express reason, I had borrowed the
half-guinea, that I might not be without a fund for my
travelling-expenses.  Accordingly, when the Saturday night came,
and we were all waiting in the warehouse to be paid, and Tipp the
carman, who always took precedence, went in first to draw his
money, I shook Mick Walker by the hand; asked him, when it came to
his turn to be paid, to say to Mr. Quinion that I had gone to move
my box to Tipp's; and, bidding a last good night to Mealy Potatoes,
ran away.

My box was at my old lodging, over the water, and I had written a
direction for it on the back of one of our address cards that we
nailed on the casks: 'Master David, to be left till called for, at
the Coach Office, Dover.'  This I had in my pocket ready to put on
the box, after I should have got it out of the house; and as I went
towards my lodging, I looked about me for someone who would help me
to carry it to the booking-office.

There was a long-legged young man with a very little empty
donkey-cart, standing near the Obelisk, in the Blackfriars Road,
whose eye I caught as I was going by, and who, addressing me as
'Sixpenn'orth of bad ha'pence,' hoped 'I should know him agin to
swear to' - in allusion, I have no doubt, to my staring at him.  I
stopped to assure him that I had not done so in bad manners, but
uncertain whether he might or might not like a job.

'Wot job?' said the long-legged young man.

'To move a box,' I answered.

'Wot box?' said the long-legged young man.

I told him mine, which was down that street there, and which I
wanted him to take to the Dover coach office for sixpence.

'Done with you for a tanner!' said the long-legged young man, and
directly got upon his cart, which was nothing but a large wooden
tray on wheels, and rattled away at such a rate, that it was as
much as I could do to keep pace with the donkey.

There was a defiant manner about this young man, and particularly
about the way in which he chewed straw as he spoke to me, that I
did not much like; as the bargain was made, however, I took him
upstairs to the room I was leaving, and we brought the box down,
and put it on his cart.  Now, I was unwilling to put the
direction-card on there, lest any of my landlord's family should
fathom what I was doing, and detain me; so I said to the young man
that I would be glad if he would stop for a minute, when he came to
the dead-wall of the King's Bench prison.  The words were no sooner
out of my mouth, than he rattled away as if he, my box, the cart,
and the donkey, were all equally mad; and I was quite out of breath
with running and calling after him, when I caught him at the place
appointed.

Being much flushed and excited, I tumbled my half-guinea out of my
pocket in pulling the card out.  I put it in my mouth for safety,
and though my hands trembled a good deal, had just tied the card on
very much to my satisfaction, when I felt myself violently chucked
under the chin by the long-legged young man, and saw my half-guinea
fly out of my mouth into his hand.

'Wot!' said the young man, seizing me by my jacket collar, with a
frightful grin.  'This is a pollis case, is it?  You're a-going to
bolt, are you?  Come to the pollis, you young warmin, come to the
pollis!'

'You give me my money back, if you please,' said I, very much
frightened; 'and leave me alone.'

'Come to the pollis!' said the young man.  'You shall prove it
yourn to the pollis.'

'Give me my box and money, will you,' I cried, bursting into tears.

The young man still replied: 'Come to the pollis!' and was dragging
me against the donkey in a violent manner, as if there were any
affinity between that animal and a magistrate, when he changed his
mind, jumped into the cart, sat upon my box, and, exclaiming that
he would drive to the pollis straight, rattled away harder than
ever.

I ran after him as fast as I could, but I had no breath to call out
with, and should not have dared to call out, now, if I had.  I
narrowly escaped being run over, twenty times at least, in half a
mile.  Now I lost him, now I saw him, now I lost him, now I was cut
at with a whip, now shouted at, now down in the mud, now up again,
now running into somebody's arms, now running headlong at a post. 
At length, confused by fright and heat, and doubting whether half
London might not by this time be turning out for my apprehension,
I left the young man to go where he would with my box and money;
and, panting and crying, but never stopping, faced about for
Greenwich, which I had understood was on the Dover Road: taking
very little more out of the world, towards the retreat of my aunt,
Miss Betsey, than I had brought into it, on the night when my
arrival gave her so much umbrage.

CHAPTER 13
THE SEQUEL OF MY RESOLUTION

For anything I know, I may have had some wild idea of running all
the way to Dover, when I gave up the pursuit of the young man with
the donkey-cart, and started for Greenwich.  My scattered senses
were soon collected as to that point, if I had; for I came to a
stop in the Kent Road, at a terrace with a piece of water before
it, and a great foolish image in the middle, blowing a dry shell. 
Here I sat down on a doorstep, quite spent and exhausted with the
efforts I had already made, and with hardly breath enough to cry
for the loss of my box and half-guinea.

It was by this time dark; I heard the clocks strike ten, as I sat
resting.  But it was a summer night, fortunately, and fine weather. 
When I had recovered my breath, and had got rid of a stifling
sensation in my throat, I rose up and went on.  In the midst of my
distress, I had no notion of going back.  I doubt if I should have
had any, though there had been a Swiss snow-drift in the Kent Road.

But my standing possessed of only three-halfpence in the world (and
I am sure I wonder how they came to be left in my pocket on a
Saturday night!) troubled me none the less because I went on.  I
began to picture to myself, as a scrap of newspaper intelligence,
my being found dead in a day or two, under some hedge; and I
trudged on miserably, though as fast as I could, until I happened
to pass a little shop, where it was written up that ladies' and
gentlemen's wardrobes were bought, and that the best price was
given for rags, bones, and kitchen-stuff.  The master of this shop
was sitting at the door in his shirt-sleeves, smoking; and as there
were a great many coats and pairs of trousers dangling from the low
ceiling, and only two feeble candles burning inside to show what
they were, I fancied that he looked like a man of a revengeful
disposition, who had hung all his enemies, and was enjoying
himself.

My late experiences with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber suggested to me that
here might be a means of keeping off the wolf for a little while. 
I went up the next by-street, took off my waistcoat, rolled it
neatly under my arm, and came back to the shop door.

'If you please, sir,' I said, 'I am to sell this for a fair price.'

Mr. Dolloby - Dolloby was the name over the shop door, at least -
took the waistcoat, stood his pipe on its head, against the
door-post, went into the shop, followed by me, snuffed the two
candles with his fingers, spread the waistcoat on the counter, and
looked at it there, held it up against the light, and looked at it
there, and ultimately said:

'What do you call a price, now, for this here little weskit?'

'Oh! you know best, sir,' I returned modestly.

'I can't be buyer and seller too,' said Mr. Dolloby.  'Put a price
on this here little weskit.'

'Would eighteenpence be?'- I hinted, after some hesitation.

Mr. Dolloby rolled it up again, and gave it me back.  'I should rob
my family,' he said, 'if I was to offer ninepence for it.'

This was a disagreeable way of putting the business; because it
imposed upon me, a perfect stranger, the unpleasantness of asking
Mr. Dolloby to rob his family on my account.  My circumstances
being so very pressing, however, I said I would take ninepence for
it, if he pleased.  Mr. Dolloby, not without some grumbling, gave
ninepence.  I wished him good night, and walked out of the shop the
richer by that sum, and the poorer by a waistcoat.  But when I
buttoned my jacket, that was not much.
Indeed, I foresaw pretty clearly that my jacket would go next, and
that I should have to make the best of my way to Dover in a shirt
and a pair of trousers, and might deem myself lucky if I got there
even in that trim.  But my mind did not run so much on this as
might be supposed.  Beyond a general impression of the distance
before me, and of the young man with the donkey-cart having used me
cruelly, I think I had no very urgent sense of my difficulties when
I once again set off with my ninepence in my pocket.

A plan had occurred to me for passing the night, which I was going
to carry into execution.  This was, to lie behind the wall at the
back of my old school, in a corner where there used to be a
haystack.  I imagined it would be a kind of company to have the
boys, and the bedroom where I used to tell the stories, so near me:
although the boys would know nothing of my being there, and the
bedroom would yield me no shelter.

I had had a hard day's work, and was pretty well jaded when I came
climbing out, at last, upon the level of Blackheath.  It cost me
some trouble to find out Salem House; but I found it, and I found
a haystack in the corner, and I lay down by it; having first walked
round the wall, and looked up at the windows, and seen that all was
dark and silent within.  Never shall I forget the lonely sensation
of first lying down, without a roof above my head!

Sleep came upon me as it came on many other outcasts, against whom
house-doors were locked, and house-dogs barked, that night - and I
dreamed of lying on my old school-bed, talking to the boys in my
room; and found myself sitting upright, with Steerforth's name upon
my lips, looking wildly at the stars that were glistening and
glimmering above me.  When I remembered where I was at that
untimely hour, a feeling stole upon me that made me get up, afraid
of I don't know what, and walk about.  But the fainter glimmering
of the stars, and the pale light in the sky where the day was
coming, reassured me: and my eyes being very heavy, I lay down
again and slept - though with a knowledge in my sleep that it was
cold - until the warm beams of the sun, and the ringing of the
getting-up bell at Salem House, awoke me.  If I could have hoped
that Steerforth was there, I would have lurked about until he came
out alone; but I knew he must have left long since.  Traddles still
remained, perhaps, but it was very doubtful; and I had not
sufficient confidence in his discretion or good luck, however
strong my reliance was on his good nature, to wish to trust him
with my situation.  So I crept away from the wall as Mr. Creakle's
boys were getting up, and struck into the long dusty track which I
had first known to be the Dover Road when I was one of them, and
when I little expected that any eyes would ever see me the wayfarer
I was now, upon it.

What a different Sunday morning from the old Sunday morning at
Yarmouth!  In due time I heard the church-bells ringing, as I
plodded on; and I met people who were going to church; and I passed
a church or two where the congregation were inside, and the sound
of singing came out into the sunshine, while the beadle sat and
cooled himself in the shade of the porch, or stood beneath the
yew-tree, with his hand to his forehead, glowering at me going by. 
But the peace and rest of the old Sunday morning were on
everything, except me.  That was the difference.  I felt quite
wicked in my dirt and dust, with my tangled hair.  But for the
quiet picture I had conjured up, of my mother in her youth and
beauty, weeping by the fire, and my aunt relenting to her, I hardly
think I should have had the courage to go on until next day.  But
it always went before me, and I followed.

I got, that Sunday, through three-and-twenty miles on the straight
road, though not very easily, for I was new to that kind of toil. 
I see myself, as evening closes in, coming over the bridge at
Rochester, footsore and tired, and eating bread that I had bought
for supper.  One or two little houses, with the notice, 'Lodgings
for Travellers', hanging out, had tempted me; but I was afraid of
spending the few pence I had, and was even more afraid of the
vicious looks of the trampers I had met or overtaken.  I sought no
shelter, therefore, but the sky; and toiling into Chatham, - which,
in that night's aspect, is a mere dream of chalk, and drawbridges,
and mastless ships in a muddy river, roofed like Noah's arks, -
crept, at last, upon a sort of grass-grown battery overhanging a
lane, where a sentry was walking to and fro.  Here I lay down, near
a cannon; and, happy in the society of the sentry's footsteps,
though he knew no more of my being above him than the boys at Salem
House had known of my lying by the wall, slept soundly until
morning.

Very stiff and sore of foot I was in the morning, and quite dazed
by the beating of drums and marching of troops, which seemed to hem
me in on every side when I went down towards the long narrow
street.  Feeling that I could go but a very little way that day, if
I were to reserve any strength for getting to my journey's end, I
resolved to make the sale of my jacket its principal business. 
Accordingly, I took the jacket off, that I might learn to do
without it; and carrying it under my arm, began a tour of
inspection of the various slop-shops.

It was a likely place to sell a jacket in; for the dealers in
second-hand clothes were numerous, and were, generally speaking, on
the look-out for customers at their shop doors.  But as most of
them had, hanging up among their stock, an officer's coat or two,
epaulettes and all, I was rendered timid by the costly nature of
their dealings, and walked about for a long time without offering
my merchandise to anyone.

This modesty of mine directed my attention to the marine-store
shops, and such shops as Mr. Dolloby's, in preference to the
regular dealers.  At last I found one that I thought looked
promising, at the corner of a dirty lane, ending in an enclosure
full of stinging-nettles, against the palings of which some
second-hand sailors' clothes, that seemed to have overflowed the
shop, were fluttering among some cots, and rusty guns, and oilskin
hats, and certain trays full of so many old rusty keys of so many
sizes that they seemed various enough to open all the doors in the
world.

Into this shop, which was low and small, and which was darkened
rather than lighted by a little window, overhung with clothes, and
was descended into by some steps, I went with a palpitating heart;
which was not relieved when an ugly old man, with the lower part of
his face all covered with a stubbly grey beard, rushed out of a
dirty den behind it, and seized me by the hair of my head.  He was
a dreadful old man to look at, in a filthy flannel waistcoat, and
smelling terribly of rum.  His bedstead, covered with a tumbled and
ragged piece of patchwork, was in the den he had come from, where
another little window showed a prospect of more stinging-nettles,
and a lame donkey.

'Oh, what do you want?' grinned this old man, in a fierce,
monotonous whine.  'Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want?  Oh,
my lungs and liver, what do you want?  Oh, goroo, goroo!'

I was so much dismayed by these words, and particularly by the
repetition of the last unknown one, which was a kind of rattle in
his throat, that I could make no answer; hereupon the old man,
still holding me by the hair, repeated:

'Oh, what do you want?  Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want? 
Oh, my lungs and liver, what do you want?  Oh, goroo!' - which he
screwed out of himself, with an energy that made his eyes start in
his head.

'I wanted to know,' I said, trembling, 'if you would buy a jacket.'

'Oh, let's see the jacket!' cried the old man.  'Oh, my heart on
fire, show the jacket to us!  Oh, my eyes and limbs, bring the
jacket out!'

With that he took his trembling hands, which were like the claws of
a great bird, out of my hair; and put on a pair of spectacles, not
at all ornamental to his inflamed eyes.

'Oh, how much for the jacket?' cried the old man, after examining
it.  'Oh - goroo! - how much for the jacket?'

'Half-a-crown,' I answered, recovering myself.

'Oh, my lungs and liver,' cried the old man, 'no!  Oh, my eyes, no! 
Oh, my limbs, no!  Eighteenpence.  Goroo!'

Every time he uttered this ejaculation, his eyes seemed to be in
danger of starting out; and every sentence he spoke, he delivered
in a sort of tune, always exactly the same, and more like a gust of
wind, which begins low, mounts up high, and falls again, than any
other comparison I can find for it.

'Well,' said I, glad to have closed the bargain, 'I'll take
eighteenpence.'

'Oh, my liver!' cried the old man, throwing the jacket on a shelf. 
'Get out of the shop!  Oh, my lungs, get out of the shop!  Oh, my
eyes and limbs - goroo! - don't ask for money; make it an
exchange.'  I never was so frightened in my life, before or since;
but I told him humbly that I wanted money, and that nothing else
was of any use to me, but that I would wait for it, as he desired,
outside, and had no wish to hurry him.  So I went outside, and sat
down in the shade in a corner.  And I sat there so many hours, that
the shade became sunlight, and the sunlight became shade again, and
still I sat there waiting for the money.

There never was such another drunken madman in that line of
business, I hope.  That he was well known in the neighbourhood, and
enjoyed the reputation of having sold himself to the devil, I soon
understood from the visits he received from the boys, who
continually came skirmishing about the shop, shouting that legend,
and calling to him to bring out his gold.  'You ain't poor, you
know, Charley, as you pretend.  Bring out your gold.  Bring out
some of the gold you sold yourself to the devil for.  Come!  It's
in the lining of the mattress, Charley.  Rip it open and let's have
some!'  This, and many offers to lend him a knife for the purpose,
exasperated him to such a degree, that the whole day was a
succession of rushes on his part, and flights on the part of the
boys.  Sometimes in his rage he would take me for one of them, and
come at me, mouthing as if he were going to tear me in pieces;
then, remembering me, just in time, would dive into the shop, and
lie upon his bed, as I thought from the sound of his voice, yelling
in a frantic way, to his own windy tune, the 'Death of Nelson';
with an Oh! before every line, and innumerable Goroos interspersed. 
As if this were not bad enough for me, the boys, connecting me with
the establishment, on account of the patience and perseverance with
which I sat outside, half-dressed, pelted me, and used me very ill
all day.

He made many attempts to induce me to consent to an exchange; at
one time coming out with a fishing-rod, at another with a fiddle,
at another with a cocked hat, at another with a flute.  But I
resisted all these overtures, and sat there in desperation; each
time asking him, with tears in my eyes, for my money or my jacket. 
At last he began to pay me in halfpence at a time; and was full two
hours getting by easy stages to a shilling.

'Oh, my eyes and limbs!' he then cried, peeping hideously out of
the shop, after a long pause, 'will you go for twopence more?'

'I can't,' I said; 'I shall be starved.'

'Oh, my lungs and liver, will you go for threepence?'

'I would go for nothing, if I could,' I said, 'but I want the money
badly.'

'Oh, go-roo!' (it is really impossible to express how he twisted
this ejaculation out of himself, as he peeped round the door-post
at me, showing nothing but his crafty old head); 'will you go for
fourpence?'

I was so faint and weary that I closed with this offer; and taking
the money out of his claw, not without trembling, went away more
hungry and thirsty than I had ever been, a little before sunset. 
But at an expense of threepence I soon refreshed myself completely;
and, being in better spirits then, limped seven miles upon my road.

My bed at night was under another haystack, where I rested
comfortably, after having washed my blistered feet in a stream, and
dressed them as well as I was able, with some cool leaves.  When I
took the road again next morning, I found that it lay through a
succession of hop-grounds and orchards.  It was sufficiently late
in the year for the orchards to be ruddy with ripe apples; and in
a few places the hop-pickers were already at work.  I thought it
all extremely beautiful, and made up my mind to sleep among the
hops that night: imagining some cheerful companionship in the long
perspectives of poles, with the graceful leaves twining round them.

The trampers were worse than ever that day, and inspired me with a
dread that is yet quite fresh in my mind.  Some of them were most
ferocious-looking ruffians, who stared at me as I went by; and
stopped, perhaps, and called after me to come back and speak to
them, and when I took to my heels, stoned me.  I recollect one
young fellow - a tinker, I suppose, from his wallet and brazier -
who had a woman with him, and who faced about and stared at me
thus; and then roared to me in such a tremendous voice to come
back, that I halted and looked round.

'Come here, when you're called,' said the tinker, 'or I'll rip your
young body open.'

I thought it best to go back.  As I drew nearer to them, trying to
propitiate the tinker by my looks, I observed that the woman had a
black eye.

'Where are you going?' said the tinker, gripping the bosom of my
shirt with his blackened hand.

'I am going to Dover,' I said.

'Where do you come from?' asked the tinker, giving his hand another
turn in my shirt, to hold me more securely.

'I come from London,' I said.

'What lay are you upon?' asked the tinker.  'Are you a prig?'

'N-no,' I said.

'Ain't you, by G--?  If you make a brag of your honesty to me,'
said the tinker, 'I'll knock your brains out.'

With his disengaged hand he made a menace of striking me, and then
looked at me from head to foot.

'Have you got the price of a pint of beer about you?' said the
tinker.  'If you have, out with it, afore I take it away!'

I should certainly have produced it, but that I met the woman's
look, and saw her very slightly shake her head, and form 'No!' with
her lips.

'I am very poor,' I said, attempting to smile, 'and have got no
money.'

'Why, what do you mean?' said the tinker, looking so sternly at me,
that I almost feared he saw the money in my pocket.

'Sir!' I stammered.

'What do you mean,' said the tinker, 'by wearing my brother's silk
handkerchief!  Give it over here!'  And he had mine off my neck in
a moment, and tossed it to the woman.

The woman burst into a fit of laughter, as if she thought this a
joke, and tossed it back to me, nodded once, as slightly as before,
and made the word 'Go!' with her lips.  Before I could obey,
however, the tinker seized the handkerchief out of my hand with a
roughness that threw me away like a feather, and putting it loosely
round his own neck, turned upon the woman with an oath, and knocked
her down.  I never shall forget seeing her fall backward on the
hard road, and lie there with her bonnet tumbled off, and her hair
all whitened in the dust; nor, when I looked back from a distance,
seeing her sitting on the pathway, which was a bank by the
roadside, wiping the blood from her face with a corner of her
shawl, while he went on ahead.

This adventure frightened me so, that, afterwards, when I saw any
of these people coming, I turned back until I could find a
hiding-place, where I remained until they had gone out of sight;
which happened so often, that I was very seriously delayed.  But
under this difficulty, as under all the other difficulties of my
journey, I seemed to be sustained and led on by my fanciful picture
of my mother in her youth, before I came into the world.  It always
kept me company.  It was there, among the hops, when I lay down to
sleep; it was with me on my waking in the morning; it went before
me all day.  I have associated it, ever since, with the sunny
street of Canterbury, dozing as it were in the hot light; and with
the sight of its old houses and gateways, and the stately, grey
Cathedral, with the rooks sailing round the towers.  When I came,
at last, upon the bare, wide downs near Dover, it relieved the
solitary aspect of the scene with hope; and not until I reached
that first great aim of my journey, and actually set foot in the
town itself, on the sixth day of my flight, did it desert me.  But
then, strange to say, when I stood with my ragged shoes, and my
dusty, sunburnt, half-clothed figure, in the place so long desired,
it seemed to vanish like a dream, and to leave me helpless and
dispirited.

I inquired about my aunt among the boatmen first, and received
various answers.  One said she lived in the South Foreland Light,
and had singed her whiskers by doing so; another, that she was made
fast to the great buoy outside the harbour, and could only be
visited at half-tide; a third, that she was locked up in Maidstone
jail for child-stealing; a fourth, that she was seen to mount a
broom in the last high wind, and make direct for Calais.  The
fly-drivers, among whom I inquired next, were equally jocose and
equally disrespectful; and the shopkeepers, not liking my
appearance, generally replied, without hearing what I had to say,
that they had got nothing for me.  I felt more miserable and
destitute than I had done at any period of my running away.  My
money was all gone, I had nothing left to dispose of; I was hungry,
thirsty, and worn out; and seemed as distant from my end as if I
had remained in London.

The morning had worn away in these inquiries, and I was sitting on
the step of an empty shop at a street corner, near the
market-place, deliberating upon wandering towards those other
places which had been mentioned, when a fly-driver, coming by with
his carriage, dropped a horsecloth.  Something good-natured in the
man's face, as I handed it up, encouraged me to ask him if he could
tell me where Miss Trotwood lived; though I had asked the question
so often, that it almost died upon my lips.

'Trotwood,' said he.  'Let me see.  I know the name, too.  Old
lady?'

'Yes,' I said, 'rather.'

'Pretty stiff in the back?' said he, making himself upright.

'Yes,' I said.  'I should think it very likely.'

'Carries a bag?' said he - 'bag with a good deal of room in it - is
gruffish, and comes down upon you, sharp?'

My heart sank within me as I acknowledged the undoubted accuracy of
this description.

'Why then, I tell you what,' said he.  'If you go up there,'
pointing with his whip towards the heights, 'and keep right on till
you come to some houses facing the sea, I think you'll hear of her. 
My opinion is she won't stand anything, so here's a penny for you.'

I accepted the gift thankfully, and bought a loaf with it. 
Dispatching this refreshment by the way, I went in the direction my
friend had indicated, and walked on a good distance without coming
to the houses he had mentioned.  At length I saw some before me;
and approaching them, went into a little shop (it was what we used
to call a general shop, at home), and inquired if they could have
the goodness to tell me where Miss Trotwood lived.  I addressed
myself to a man behind the counter, who was weighing some rice for
a young woman; but the latter, taking the inquiry to herself,
turned round quickly.

'My mistress?' she said.  'What do you want with her, boy?'

'I want,' I replied, 'to speak to her, if you please.'

'To beg of her, you mean,' retorted the damsel.

'No,' I said, 'indeed.'  But suddenly remembering that in truth I
came for no other purpose, I held my peace in confusion, and felt
my face burn.

MY aunt's handmaid, as I supposed she was from what she had said,
put her rice in a little basket and walked out of the shop; telling
me that I could follow her, if I wanted to know where Miss Trotwood
lived.  I needed no second permission; though I was by this time in
such a state of consternation and agitation, that my legs shook
under me.  I followed the young woman, and we soon came to a very
neat little cottage with cheerful bow-windows: in front of it, a
small square gravelled court or garden full of flowers, carefully
tended, and smelling deliciously.

'This is Miss Trotwood's,' said the young woman.  'Now you know;
and that's all I have got to say.'  With which words she hurried
into the house, as if to shake off the responsibility of my
appearance; and left me standing at the garden-gate, looking
disconsolately over the top of it towards the parlour window, where
a muslin curtain partly undrawn in the middle, a large round green
screen or fan fastened on to the windowsill, a small table, and a
great chair, suggested to me that my aunt might be at that moment
seated in awful state.

My shoes were by this time in a woeful condition.  The soles had
shed themselves bit by bit, and the upper leathers had broken and
burst until the very shape and form of shoes had departed from
them.  My hat (which had served me for a night-cap, too) was so
crushed and bent, that no old battered handleless saucepan on a
dunghill need have been ashamed to vie with it.  My shirt and
trousers, stained with heat, dew, grass, and the Kentish soil on
which I had slept - and torn besides - might have frightened the
birds from my aunt's garden, as I stood at the gate.  My hair had
known no comb or brush since I left London.  My face, neck, and
hands, from unaccustomed exposure to the air and sun, were burnt to
a berry-brown.  From head to foot I was powdered almost as white
with chalk and dust, as if I had come out of a lime-kiln.  In this
plight, and with a strong consciousness of it, I waited to
introduce myself to, and make my first impression on, my formidable
aunt.

The unbroken stillness of the parlour window leading me to infer,
after a while, that she was not there, I lifted up my eyes to the
window above it, where I saw a florid, pleasant-looking gentleman,
with a grey head, who shut up one eye in a grotesque manner, nodded
his head at me several times, shook it at me as often, laughed, and
went away.

I had been discomposed enough before; but I was so much the more
discomposed by this unexpected behaviour, that I was on the point
of slinking off, to think how I had best proceed, when there came
out of the house a lady with her handkerchief tied over her cap,
and a pair of gardening gloves on her hands, wearing a gardening
pocket like a toll-man's apron, and carrying a great knife.  I knew
her immediately to be Miss Betsey, for she came stalking out of the
house exactly as my poor mother had so often described her stalking
up our garden at Blunderstone Rookery.

'Go away!' said Miss Betsey, shaking her head, and making a distant
chop in the air with her knife.  'Go along!  No boys here!'

I watched her, with my heart at my lips, as she marched to a corner
of her garden, and stooped to dig up some little root there.  Then,
without a scrap of courage, but with a great deal of desperation,
I went softly in and stood beside her, touching her with my finger.

'If you please, ma'am,' I began.

She started and looked up.

'If you please, aunt.'

'EH?' exclaimed Miss Betsey, in a tone of amazement I have never
heard approached.

'If you please, aunt, I am your nephew.'

'Oh, Lord!' said my aunt.  And sat flat down in the garden-path.

'I am David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk - where you
came, on the night when I was born, and saw my dear mama.  I have
been very unhappy since she died.  I have been slighted, and taught
nothing, and thrown upon myself, and put to work not fit for me. 
It made me run away to you.  I was robbed at first setting out, and
have walked all the way, and have never slept in a bed since I
began the journey.'  Here my self-support gave way all at once; and
with a movement of my hands, intended to show her my ragged state,
and call it to witness that I had suffered something, I broke into
a passion of crying, which I suppose had been pent up within me all
the week.

My aunt, with every sort of expression but wonder discharged from
her countenance, sat on the gravel, staring at me, until I began to
cry; when she got up in a great hurry, collared me, and took me
into the parlour.  Her first proceeding there was to unlock a tall
press, bring out several bottles, and pour some of the contents of
each into my mouth.  I think they must have been taken out at
random, for I am sure I tasted aniseed water, anchovy sauce, and
salad dressing.  When she had administered these restoratives, as
I was still quite hysterical, and unable to control my sobs, she
put me on the sofa, with a shawl under my head, and the
handkerchief from her own head under my feet, lest I should sully
the cover; and then, sitting herself down behind the green fan or
screen I have already mentioned, so that I could not see her face,
ejaculated at intervals, 'Mercy on us!' letting those exclamations
off like minute guns.

After a time she rang the bell.  'Janet,' said my aunt, when her
servant came in.  'Go upstairs, give my compliments to Mr. Dick,
and say I wish to speak to him.'

Janet looked a little surprised to see me lying stiffly on the sofa
(I was afraid to move lest it should be displeasing to my aunt),
but went on her errand.  My aunt, with her hands behind her, walked
up and down the room, until the gentleman who had squinted at me
from the upper window came in laughing.

'Mr. Dick,' said my aunt, 'don't be a fool, because nobody can be
more discreet than you can, when you choose.  We all know that.  So
don't be a fool, whatever you are.'

The gentleman was serious immediately, and looked at me, I thought,
as if he would entreat me to say nothing about the window.

'Mr. Dick,' said my aunt, 'you have heard me mention David
Copperfield?  Now don't pretend not to have a memory, because you
and I know better.'

'David Copperfield?' said Mr. Dick, who did not appear to me to
remember much about it.  'David Copperfield?  Oh yes, to be sure. 
David, certainly.'

'Well,' said my aunt, 'this is his boy - his son.  He would be as
like his father as it's possible to be, if he was not so like his
mother, too.'

'His son?' said Mr. Dick.  'David's son?  Indeed!'

'Yes,' pursued my aunt, 'and he has done a pretty piece of
business.  He has run away.  Ah!  His sister, Betsey Trotwood,
never would have run away.'  My aunt shook her head firmly,
confident in the character and behaviour of the girl who never was
born.

'Oh! you think she wouldn't have run away?' said Mr. Dick.

'Bless and save the man,' exclaimed my aunt, sharply, 'how he
talks!  Don't I know she wouldn't?  She would have lived with her
god-mother, and we should have been devoted to one another.  Where,
in the name of wonder, should his sister, Betsey Trotwood, have run
from, or to?'

'Nowhere,' said Mr. Dick.

'Well then,' returned my aunt, softened by the reply, 'how can you
pretend to be wool-gathering, Dick, when you are as sharp as a
surgeon's lancet?  Now, here you see young David Copperfield, and
the question I put to you is, what shall I do with him?'

'What shall you do with him?' said Mr. Dick, feebly, scratching his
head.  'Oh! do with him?'

'Yes,' said my aunt, with a grave look, and her forefinger held up. 
'Come!  I want some very sound advice.'

'Why, if I was you,' said Mr. Dick, considering, and looking
vacantly at me, 'I should -' The contemplation of me seemed to
inspire him with a sudden idea, and he added, briskly, 'I should
wash him!'

'Janet,' said my aunt, turning round with a quiet triumph, which I
did not then understand, 'Mr. Dick sets us all right.  Heat the
bath!'

Although I was deeply interested in this dialogue, I could not help
observing my aunt, Mr. Dick, and Janet, while it was in progress,
and completing a survey I had already been engaged in making of the
room.

MY aunt was a tall, hard-featured lady, but by no means
ill-looking.  There was an inflexibility in her face, in her voice,
in her gait and carriage, amply sufficient to account for the
effect she had made upon a gentle creature like my mother; but her
features were rather handsome than otherwise, though unbending and
austere.  I particularly noticed that she had a very quick, bright
eye.  Her hair, which was grey, was arranged in two plain
divisions, under what I believe would be called a mob-cap; I mean
a cap, much more common then than now, with side-pieces fastening
under the chin.  Her dress was of a lavender colour, and perfectly
neat; but scantily made, as if she desired to be as little
encumbered as possible.  I remember that I thought it, in form,
more like a riding-habit with the superfluous skirt cut off, than
anything else.  She wore at her side a gentleman's gold watch, if
I might judge from its size and make, with an appropriate chain and
seals; she had some linen at her throat not unlike a shirt-collar,
and things at her wrists like little shirt-wristbands.

Mr. Dick, as I have already said, was grey-headed, and florid: I
should have said all about him, in saying so, had not his head been
curiously bowed - not by age; it reminded me of one of Mr.
Creakle's boys' heads after a beating - and his grey eyes prominent
and large, with a strange kind of watery brightness in them that
made me, in combination with his vacant manner, his submission to
my aunt, and his childish delight when she praised him, suspect him
of being a little mad; though, if he were mad, how he came to be
there puzzled me extremely.  He was dressed like any other ordinary
gentleman, in a loose grey morning coat and waistcoat, and white
trousers; and had his watch in his fob, and his money in his
pockets: which he rattled as if he were very proud of it.

Janet was a pretty blooming girl, of about nineteen or twenty, and
a perfect picture of neatness.  Though I made no further
observation of her at the moment, I may mention here what I did not
discover until afterwards, namely, that she was one of a series of
protegees whom my aunt had taken into her service expressly to
educate in a renouncement of mankind, and who had generally
completed their abjuration by marrying the baker.

The room was as neat as Janet or my aunt.  As I laid down my pen,
a moment since, to think of it, the air from the sea came blowing
in again, mixed with the perfume of the flowers; and I saw the
old-fashioned furniture brightly rubbed and polished, my aunt's
inviolable chair and table by the round green fan in the
bow-window, the drugget-covered carpet, the cat, the kettle-holder,
the two canaries, the old china, the punchbowl full of dried
rose-leaves, the tall press guarding all sorts of bottles and pots,
and, wonderfully out of keeping with the rest, my dusty self upon
the sofa, taking note of everything.

Janet had gone away to get the bath ready, when my aunt, to my
great alarm, became in one moment rigid with indignation, and had
hardly voice to cry out, 'Janet!  Donkeys!'

Upon which, Janet came running up the stairs as if the house were
in flames, darted out on a little piece of green in front, and
warned off two saddle-donkeys, lady-ridden, that had presumed to
set hoof upon it; while my aunt, rushing out of the house, seized
the bridle of a third animal laden with a bestriding child, turned
him, led him forth from those sacred precincts, and boxed the ears
of the unlucky urchin in attendance who had dared to profane that
hallowed ground.

To this hour I don't know whether my aunt had any lawful right of
way over that patch of green; but she had settled it in her own
mind that she had, and it was all the same to her.  The one great
outrage of her life, demanding to be constantly avenged, was the
passage of a donkey over that immaculate spot.  In whatever
occupation she was engaged, however interesting to her the
conversation in which she was taking part, a donkey turned the
current of her ideas in a moment, and she was upon him straight. 
Jugs of water, and watering-pots, were kept in secret places ready
to be discharged on the offending boys; sticks were laid in ambush
behind the door; sallies were made at all hours; and incessant war
prevailed.  Perhaps this was an agreeable excitement to the
donkey-boys; or perhaps the more sagacious of the donkeys,
understanding how the case stood, delighted with constitutional
obstinacy in coming that way.  I only know that there were three
alarms before the bath was ready; and that on the occasion of the
last and most desperate of all, I saw my aunt engage,
single-handed, with a sandy-headed lad of fifteen, and bump his
sandy head against her own gate, before he seemed to comprehend
what was the matter.  These interruptions were of the more
ridiculous to me, because she was giving me broth out of a
table-spoon at the time (having firmly persuaded herself that I was
actually starving, and must receive nourishment at first in very
small quantities), and, while my mouth was yet open to receive the
spoon, she would put it back into the basin, cry 'Janet!  Donkeys!'
and go out to the assault.

The bath was a great comfort.  For I began to be sensible of acute
pains in my limbs from lying out in the fields, and was now so
tired and low that I could hardly keep myself awake for five
minutes together.  When I had bathed, they (I mean my aunt and
Janet) enrobed me in a shirt and a pair of trousers belonging to
Mr. Dick, and tied me up in two or three great shawls.  What sort
of bundle I looked like, I don't know, but I felt a very hot one. 
Feeling also very faint and drowsy, I soon lay down on the sofa
again and fell asleep.

It might have been a dream, originating in the fancy which had
occupied my mind so long, but I awoke with the impression that my
aunt had come and bent over me, and had put my hair away from my
face, and laid my head more comfortably, and had then stood looking
at me.  The words, 'Pretty fellow,' or 'Poor fellow,' seemed to be
in my ears, too; but certainly there was nothing else, when I
awoke, to lead me to believe that they had been uttered by my aunt,
who sat in the bow-window gazing at the sea from behind the green
fan, which was mounted on a kind of swivel, and turned any way.

We dined soon after I awoke, off a roast fowl and a pudding; I
sitting at table, not unlike a trussed bird myself, and moving my
arms with considerable difficulty.  But as my aunt had swathed me
up, I made no complaint of being inconvenienced.  All this time I
was deeply anxious to know what she was going to do with me; but
she took her dinner in profound silence, except when she
occasionally fixed her eyes on me sitting opposite, and said,
'Mercy upon us!' which did not by any means relieve my anxiety.

The cloth being drawn, and some sherry put upon the table (of which
I had a glass), my aunt sent up for Mr. Dick again, who joined us,
and looked as wise as he could when she requested him to attend to
my story, which she elicited from me, gradually, by a course of
questions.  During my recital, she kept her eyes on Mr. Dick, who
I thought would have gone to sleep but for that, and who,
whensoever he lapsed into a smile, was checked by a frown from my
aunt.

'Whatever possessed that poor unfortunate Baby, that she must go
and be married again,' said my aunt, when I had finished, 'I can't
conceive.'

'Perhaps she fell in love with her second husband,' Mr. Dick
suggested.

'Fell in love!' repeated my aunt.  'What do you mean?  What
business had she to do it?'

'Perhaps,' Mr. Dick simpered, after thinking a little, 'she did it
for pleasure.'

'Pleasure, indeed!' replied my aunt.  'A mighty pleasure for the
poor Baby to fix her simple faith upon any dog of a fellow, certain
to ill-use her in some way or other.  What did she propose to
herself, I should like to know!  She had had one husband.  She had
seen David Copperfield out of the world, who was always running
after wax dolls from his cradle.  She had got a baby - oh, there
were a pair of babies when she gave birth to this child sitting
here, that Friday night! - and what more did she want?'

Mr. Dick secretly shook his head at me, as if he thought there was
no getting over this.

'She couldn't even have a baby like anybody else,' said my aunt. 
'Where was this child's sister, Betsey Trotwood?  Not forthcoming. 
Don't tell me!'

Mr. Dick seemed quite frightened.

'That little man of a doctor, with his head on one side,' said my
aunt, 'Jellips, or whatever his name was, what was he about?  All
he could do, was to say to me, like a robin redbreast - as he is -
"It's a boy."  A boy!  Yah, the imbecility of the whole set of
'em!'

The heartiness of the ejaculation startled Mr. Dick exceedingly;
and me, too, if I am to tell the truth.

'And then, as if this was not enough, and she had not stood
sufficiently in the light of this child's sister, Betsey Trotwood,'
said my aunt, 'she marries a second time - goes and marries a
Murderer - or a man with a name like it - and stands in THIS
child's light!  And the natural consequence is, as anybody but a
baby might have foreseen, that he prowls and wanders.  He's as like
Cain before he was grown up, as he can be.'

Mr. Dick looked hard at me, as if to identify me in this character.

'And then there's that woman with the Pagan name,' said my aunt,
'that Peggotty, she goes and gets married next.  Because she has
not seen enough of the evil attending such things, she goes and
gets married next, as the child relates.  I only hope,' said my
aunt, shaking her head, 'that her husband is one of those Poker
husbands who abound in the newspapers, and will beat her well with
one.'

I could not bear to hear my old nurse so decried, and made the
subject of such a wish.  I told my aunt that indeed she was
mistaken.  That Peggotty was the best, the truest, the most
faithful, most devoted, and most self-denying friend and servant in
the world; who had ever loved me dearly, who had ever loved my
mother dearly; who had held my mother's dying head upon her arm, on
whose face my mother had imprinted her last grateful kiss.  And my
remembrance of them both, choking me, I broke down as I was trying
to say that her home was my home, and that all she had was mine,
and that I would have gone to her for shelter, but for her humble
station, which made me fear that I might bring some trouble on her
- I broke down, I say, as I was trying to say so, and laid my face
in my hands upon the table.

'Well, well!' said my aunt, 'the child is right to stand by those
who have stood by him - Janet!  Donkeys!'

I thoroughly believe that but for those unfortunate donkeys, we
should have come to a good understanding; for my aunt had laid her
hand on my shoulder, and the impulse was upon me, thus emboldened,
to embrace her and beseech her protection.  But the interruption,
and the disorder she was thrown into by the struggle outside, put
an end to all softer ideas for the present, and kept my aunt
indignantly declaiming to Mr. Dick about her determination to
appeal for redress to the laws of her country, and to bring actions
for trespass against the whole donkey proprietorship of Dover,
until tea-time.

After tea, we sat at the window - on the look-out, as I imagined,
from my aunt's sharp expression of face, for more invaders - until
dusk, when Janet set candles, and a backgammon-board, on the table,
and pulled down the blinds.

'Now, Mr. Dick,' said my aunt, with her grave look, and her
forefinger up as before, 'I am going to ask you another question. 
Look at this child.'

'David's son?' said Mr. Dick, with an attentive, puzzled face.

'Exactly so,' returned my aunt.  'What would you do with him, now?'

'Do with David's son?' said Mr. Dick.

'Ay,' replied my aunt, 'with David's son.'

'Oh!' said Mr. Dick.  'Yes.  Do with - I should put him to bed.'

'Janet!' cried my aunt, with the same complacent triumph that I had
remarked before.  'Mr. Dick sets us all right.  If the bed is
ready, we'll take him up to it.'

Janet reporting it to be quite ready, I was taken up to it; kindly,
but in some sort like a prisoner; my aunt going in front and Janet
bringing up the rear.  The only circumstance which gave me any new
hope, was my aunt's stopping on the stairs to inquire about a smell
of fire that was prevalent there; and janet's replying that she had
been making tinder down in the kitchen, of my old shirt.  But there
were no other clothes in my room than the odd heap of things I
wore; and when I was left there, with a little taper which my aunt
forewarned me would burn exactly five minutes, I heard them lock my
door on the outside.  Turning these things over in my mind I deemed
it possible that my aunt, who could know nothing of me, might
suspect I had a habit of running away, and took precautions, on
that account, to have me in safe keeping.

The room was a pleasant one, at the top of the house, overlooking
the sea, on which the moon was shining brilliantly.  After I had
said my prayers, and the candle had burnt out, I remember how I
still sat looking at the moonlight on the water, as if I could hope
to read my fortune in it, as in a bright book; or to see my mother
with her child, coming from Heaven, along that shining path, to
look upon me as she had looked when I last saw her sweet face.  I
remember how the solemn feeling with which at length I turned my
eyes away, yielded to the sensation of gratitude and rest which the
sight of the white-curtained bed - and how much more the lying
softly down upon it, nestling in the snow-white sheets! - inspired. 
I remember how I thought of all the solitary places under the night
sky where I had slept, and how I prayed that I never might be
houseless any more, and never might forget the houseless.  I
remember how I seemed to float, then, down the melancholy glory of
that track upon the sea, away into the world of dreams.

CHAPTER 14
MY AUNT MAKES UP HER MIND ABOUT ME

On going down in the morning, I found my aunt musing so profoundly
over the breakfast table, with her elbow on the tray, that the
contents of the urn had overflowed the teapot and were laying the
whole table-cloth under water, when my entrance put her meditations
to flight.  I felt sure that I had been the subject of her
reflections, and was more than ever anxious to know her intentions
towards me.  Yet I dared not express my anxiety, lest it should
give her offence.

My eyes, however, not being so much under control as my tongue,
were attracted towards my aunt very often during breakfast.  I
never could look at her for a few moments together but I found her
looking at me - in an odd thoughtful manner, as if I were an
immense way off, instead of being on the other side of the small
round table.  When she had finished her breakfast, my aunt very
deliberately leaned back in her chair, knitted her brows, folded
her arms, and contemplated me at her leisure, with such a fixedness
of attention that I was quite overpowered by embarrassment.  Not
having as yet finished my own breakfast, I attempted to hide my
confusion by proceeding with it; but my knife tumbled over my fork,
my fork tripped up my knife, I chipped bits of bacon a surprising
height into the air instead of cutting them for my own eating, and
choked myself with my tea, which persisted in going the wrong way
instead of the right one, until I gave in altogether, and sat
blushing under my aunt's close scrutiny.

'Hallo!' said my aunt, after a long time.

I looked up, and met her sharp bright glance respectfully.

'I have written to him,' said my aunt.

'To -?'

'To your father-in-law,' said my aunt.  'I have sent him a letter
that I'll trouble him to attend to, or he and I will fall out, I
can tell him!'

'Does he know where I am, aunt?' I inquired, alarmed.

'I have told him,' said my aunt, with a nod.

'Shall I - be - given up to him?' I faltered.

'I don't know,' said my aunt.  'We shall see.'

'Oh! I can't think what I shall do,' I exclaimed, 'if I have to go
back to Mr. Murdstone!'

'I don't know anything about it,' said my aunt, shaking her head. 
'I can't say, I am sure.  We shall see.'

My spirits sank under these words, and I became very downcast and
heavy of heart.  My aunt, without appearing to take much heed of
me, put on a coarse apron with a bib, which she took out of the
press; washed up the teacups with her own hands; and, when
everything was washed and set in the tray again, and the cloth
folded and put on the top of the whole, rang for Janet to remove
it.  She next swept up the crumbs with a little broom (putting on
a pair of gloves first), until there did not appear to be one
microscopic speck left on the carpet; next dusted and arranged the
room, which was dusted and arranged to a hair'sbreadth already. 
When all these tasks were performed to her satisfaction, she took
off the gloves and apron, folded them up, put them in the
particular corner of the press from which they had been taken,
brought out her work-box to her own table in the open window, and
sat down, with the green fan between her and the light, to work.

'I wish you'd go upstairs,' said my aunt, as she threaded her
needle, 'and give my compliments to Mr. Dick, and I'll be glad to
know how he gets on with his Memorial.'

I rose with all alacrity, to acquit myself of this commission.

'I suppose,' said my aunt, eyeing me as narrowly as she had eyed
the needle in threading it, 'you think Mr. Dick a short name, eh?'

'I thought it was rather a short name, yesterday,' I confessed.

'You are not to suppose that he hasn't got a longer name, if he
chose to use it,' said my aunt, with a loftier air.  'Babley - Mr.
Richard Babley - that's the gentleman's true name.'

I was going to suggest, with a modest sense of my youth and the
familiarity I had been already guilty of, that I had better give
him the full benefit of that name, when my aunt went on to say:

'But don't you call him by it, whatever you do.  He can't bear his
name.  That's a peculiarity of his.  Though I don't know that it's
much of a peculiarity, either; for he has been ill-used enough, by
some that bear it, to have a mortal antipathy for it, Heaven knows. 
Mr. Dick is his name here, and everywhere else, now - if he ever
went anywhere else, which he don't.  So take care, child, you don't
call him anything BUT Mr. Dick.'

I promised to obey, and went upstairs with my message; thinking, as
I went, that if Mr. Dick had been working at his Memorial long, at
the same rate as I had seen him working at it, through the open
door, when I came down, he was probably getting on very well
indeed.  I found him still driving at it with a long pen, and his
head almost laid upon the paper.  He was so intent upon it, that I
had ample leisure to observe the large paper kite in a corner, the
confusion of bundles of manuscript, the number of pens, and, above
all, the quantity of ink (which he seemed to have in, in
half-gallon jars by the dozen), before he observed my being
present.

'Ha! Phoebus!' said Mr. Dick, laying down his pen.  'How does the
world go?  I'll tell you what,' he added, in a lower tone, 'I
shouldn't wish it to be mentioned, but it's a -' here he beckoned
to me, and put his lips close to my ear - 'it's a mad world.  Mad
as Bedlam, boy!' said Mr. Dick, taking snuff from a round box on
the table, and laughing heartily.

Without presuming to give my opinion on this question, I delivered
my message.

'Well,' said Mr. Dick, in answer, 'my compliments to her, and I -
I believe I have made a start.  I think I have made a start,' said
Mr. Dick, passing his hand among his grey hair, and casting
anything but a confident look at his manuscript.  'You have been to
school?'

'Yes, sir,' I answered; 'for a short time.'

'Do you recollect the date,' said Mr. Dick, looking earnestly at
me, and taking up his pen to note it down, 'when King Charles the
First had his head cut off?'
I said I believed it happened in the year sixteen hundred and
forty-nine.

'Well,' returned Mr. Dick, scratching his ear with his pen, and
looking dubiously at me.  'So the books say; but I don't see how
that can be.  Because, if it was so long ago, how could the people
about him have made that mistake of putting some of the trouble out
of his head, after it was taken off, into mine?'

I was very much surprised by the inquiry; but could give no
information on this point.

'It's very strange,' said Mr. Dick, with a despondent look upon his
papers, and with his hand among his hair again, 'that I never can
get that quite right.  I never can make that perfectly clear.  But
no matter, no matter!' he said cheerfully, and rousing himself,
'there's time enough!  My compliments to Miss Trotwood, I am
getting on very well indeed.'

I was going away, when he directed my attention to the kite.

'What do you think of that for a kite?' he said.

I answered that it was a beautiful one.  I should think it must
have been as much as seven feet high.

'I made it.  We'll go and fly it, you and I,' said Mr. Dick.  'Do
you see this?'

He showed me that it was covered with manuscript, very closely and
laboriously written; but so plainly, that as I looked along the
lines, I thought I saw some allusion to King Charles the First's
head again, in one or two places.

'There's plenty of string,' said Mr. Dick, 'and when it flies high,
it takes the facts a long way.  That's my manner of diffusing 'em. 
I don't know where they may come down.  It's according to
circumstances, and the wind, and so forth; but I take my chance of
that.'

His face was so very mild and pleasant, and had something so
reverend in it, though it was hale and hearty, that I was not sure
but that he was having a good-humoured jest with me.  So I laughed,
and he laughed, and we parted the best friends possible.

'Well, child,' said my aunt, when I went downstairs.  'And what of
Mr. Dick, this morning?'

I informed her that he sent his compliments, and was getting on
very well indeed.

'What do you think of him?' said my aunt.

I had some shadowy idea of endeavouring to evade the question, by
replying that I thought him a very nice gentleman; but my aunt was
not to be so put off, for she laid her work down in her lap, and
said, folding her hands upon it:

'Come!  Your sister Betsey Trotwood would have told me what she
thought of anyone, directly.  Be as like your sister as you can,
and speak out!'

'Is he - is Mr. Dick - I ask because I don't know, aunt - is he at
all out of his mind, then?' I stammered; for I felt I was on
dangerous ground.

'Not a morsel,' said my aunt.

'Oh, indeed!' I observed faintly.

'If there is anything in the world,' said my aunt, with great
decision and force of manner, 'that Mr. Dick is not, it's that.'

I had nothing better to offer, than another timid, 'Oh, indeed!'

'He has been CALLED mad,' said my aunt.  'I have a selfish pleasure
in saying he has been called mad, or I should not have had the
benefit of his society and advice for these last ten years and
upwards - in fact, ever since your sister, Betsey Trotwood,
disappointed me.'

'So long as that?' I said.

'And nice people they were, who had the audacity to call him mad,'
pursued my aunt.  'Mr. Dick is a sort of distant connexion of mine
- it doesn't matter how; I needn't enter into that.  If it hadn't
been for me, his own brother would have shut him up for life. 
That's all.'

I am afraid it was hypocritical in me, but seeing that my aunt felt
strongly on the subject, I tried to look as if I felt strongly too.

'A proud fool!' said my aunt.  'Because his brother was a little
eccentric - though he is not half so eccentric as a good many
people - he didn't like to have him visible about his house, and
sent him away to some private asylum-place: though he had been left
to his particular care by their deceased father, who thought him
almost a natural.  And a wise man he must have been to think so!
Mad himself, no doubt.'

Again, as my aunt looked quite convinced, I endeavoured to look
quite convinced also.

'So I stepped in,' said my aunt, 'and made him an offer.  I said,
"Your brother's sane - a great deal more sane than you are, or ever
will be, it is to be hoped.  Let him have his little income, and
come and live with me.  I am not afraid of him, I am not proud, I
am ready to take care of him, and shall not ill-treat him as some
people (besides the asylum-folks) have done."  After a good deal of
squabbling,' said my aunt, 'I got him; and he has been here ever
since.  He is the most friendly and amenable creature in existence;
and as for advice! - But nobody knows what that man's mind is,
except myself.'

My aunt smoothed her dress and shook her head, as if she smoothed
defiance of the whole world out of the one, and shook it out of the
other.

'He had a favourite sister,' said my aunt, 'a good creature, and
very kind to him.  But she did what they all do - took a husband. 
And HE did what they all do - made her wretched.  It had such an
effect upon the mind of Mr. Dick (that's not madness, I hope!)
that, combined with his fear of his brother, and his sense of his
unkindness, it threw him into a fever.  That was before he came to
me, but the recollection of it is oppressive to him even now.  Did
he say anything to you about King Charles the First, child?'

'Yes, aunt.'

'Ah!' said my aunt, rubbing her nose as if she were a little vexed. 
'That's his allegorical way of expressing it.  He connects his
illness with great disturbance and agitation, naturally, and that's
the figure, or the simile, or whatever it's called, which he
chooses to use.  And why shouldn't he, if he thinks proper!'

I said: 'Certainly, aunt.'

'It's not a business-like way of speaking,' said my aunt, 'nor a
worldly way.  I am aware of that; and that's the reason why I
insist upon it, that there shan't be a word about it in his
Memorial.'

'Is it a Memorial about his own history that he is writing, aunt?'

'Yes, child,' said my aunt, rubbing her nose again.  'He is
memorializing the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Somebody or other -
one of those people, at all events, who are paid to be memorialized
- about his affairs.  I suppose it will go in, one of these days. 
He hasn't been able to draw it up yet, without introducing that
mode of expressing himself; but it don't signify; it keeps him
employed.'

In fact, I found out afterwards that Mr. Dick had been for upwards
of ten years endeavouring to keep King Charles the First out of the
Memorial; but he had been constantly getting into it, and was there
now.

'I say again,' said my aunt, 'nobody knows what that man's mind is
except myself; and he's the most amenable and friendly creature in
existence.  If he likes to fly a kite sometimes, what of that!
Franklin used to fly a kite.  He was a Quaker, or something of that
sort, if I am not mistaken.  And a Quaker flying a kite is a much
more ridiculous object than anybody else.'

If I could have supposed that my aunt had recounted these
particulars for my especial behoof, and as a piece of confidence in
me, I should have felt very much distinguished, and should have
augured favourably from such a mark of her good opinion.  But I
could hardly help observing that she had launched into them,
chiefly because the question was raised in her own mind, and with
very little reference to me, though she had addressed herself to me
in the absence of anybody else.

At the same time, I must say that the generosity of her
championship of poor harmless Mr. Dick, not only inspired my young
breast with some selfish hope for myself, but warmed it unselfishly
towards her.  I believe that I began to know that there was
something about my aunt, notwithstanding her many eccentricities
and odd humours, to be honoured and trusted in.  Though she was
just as sharp that day as on the day before, and was in and out
about the donkeys just as often, and was thrown into a tremendous
state of indignation, when a young man, going by, ogled Janet at a
window (which was one of the gravest misdemeanours that could be
committed against my aunt's dignity), she seemed to me to command
more of my respect, if not less of my fear.

The anxiety I underwent, in the interval which necessarily elapsed
before a reply could be received to her letter to Mr. Murdstone,
was extreme; but I made an endeavour to suppress it, and to be as
agreeable as I could in a quiet way, both to my aunt and Mr. Dick. 
The latter and I would have gone out to fly the great kite; but
that I had still no other clothes than the anything but ornamental
garments with which I had been decorated on the first day, and
which confined me to the house, except for an hour after dark, when
my aunt, for my health's sake, paraded me up and down on the cliff
outside, before going to bed.  At length the reply from Mr.
Murdstone came, and my aunt informed me, to my infinite terror,
that he was coming to speak to her herself on the next day.  On the
next day, still bundled up in my curious habiliments, I sat
counting the time, flushed and heated by the conflict of sinking
hopes and rising fears within me; and waiting to be startled by the
sight of the gloomy face, whose non-arrival startled me every
minute.

MY aunt was a little more imperious and stern than usual, but I
observed no other token of her preparing herself to receive the
visitor so much dreaded by me.  She sat at work in the window, and
I sat by, with my thoughts running astray on all possible and
impossible results of Mr. Murdstone's visit, until pretty late in
the afternoon.  Our dinner had been indefinitely postponed; but it
was growing so late, that my aunt had ordered it to be got ready,
when she gave a sudden alarm of donkeys, and to my consternation
and amazement, I beheld Miss Murdstone, on a side-saddle, ride
deliberately over the sacred piece of green, and stop in front of
the house, looking about her.

'Go along with you!' cried my aunt, shaking her head and her fist
at the window.  'You have no business there.  How dare you
trespass?  Go along!  Oh! you bold-faced thing!'

MY aunt was so exasperated by the coolness with which Miss
Murdstone looked about her, that I really believe she was
motionless, and unable for the moment to dart out according to
custom.  I seized the opportunity to inform her who it was; and
that the gentleman now coming near the offender (for the way up was
very steep, and he had dropped behind), was Mr. Murdstone himself.

'I don't care who it is!' cried my aunt, still shaking her head and
gesticulating anything but welcome from the bow-window.  'I won't
be trespassed upon.  I won't allow it.  Go away!  Janet, turn him
round.  Lead him off!' and I saw, from behind my aunt, a sort of
hurried battle-piece, in which the donkey stood resisting
everybody, with all his four legs planted different ways, while
Janet tried to pull him round by the bridle, Mr. Murdstone tried to
lead him on, Miss Murdstone struck at Janet with a parasol, and
several boys, who had come to see the engagement, shouted
vigorously.  But my aunt, suddenly descrying among them the young
malefactor who was the donkey's guardian, and who was one of the
most inveterate offenders against her, though hardly in his teens,
rushed out to the scene of action, pounced upon him, captured him,
dragged him, with his jacket over his head, and his heels grinding
the ground, into the garden, and, calling upon Janet to fetch the
constables and justices, that he might be taken, tried, and
executed on the spot, held him at bay there.  This part of the
business, however, did not last long; for the young rascal, being
expert at a variety of feints and dodges, of which my aunt had no
conception, soon went whooping away, leaving some deep impressions
of his nailed boots in the flower-beds, and taking his donkey in
triumph with him.

Miss Murdstone, during the latter portion of the contest, had
dismounted, and was now waiting with her brother at the bottom of
the steps, until my aunt should be at leisure to receive them.  My
aunt, a little ruffled by the combat, marched past them into the
house, with great dignity, and took no notice of their presence,
until they were announced by Janet.

'Shall I go away, aunt?' I asked, trembling.

'No, sir,' said my aunt.  'Certainly not!'  With which she pushed
me into a corner near her, and fenced Me in with a chair, as if it
were a prison or a bar of justice.  This position I continued to
occupy during the whole interview, and from it I now saw Mr. and
Miss Murdstone enter the room.

'Oh!' said my aunt, 'I was not aware at first to whom I had the
pleasure of objecting.  But I don't allow anybody to ride over that
turf.  I make no exceptions.  I don't allow anybody to do it.'

'Your regulation is rather awkward to strangers,' said Miss
Murdstone.

'Is it!' said my aunt.

Mr. Murdstone seemed afraid of a renewal of hostilities, and
interposing began:

'Miss Trotwood!'

'I beg your pardon,' observed my aunt with a keen look.  'You are
the Mr. Murdstone who married the widow of my late nephew, David
Copperfield, of Blunderstone Rookery! - Though why Rookery, I don't
know!'

'I am,' said Mr. Murdstone.

'You'll excuse my saying, sir,' returned my aunt, 'that I think it
would have been a much better and happier thing if you had left
that poor child alone.'

'I so far agree with what Miss Trotwood has remarked,' observed
Miss Murdstone, bridling, 'that I consider our lamented Clara to
have been, in all essential respects, a mere child.'

'It is a comfort to you and me, ma'am,' said my aunt, 'who are
getting on in life, and are not likely to be made unhappy by our
personal attractions, that nobody can say the same of us.'

'No doubt!' returned Miss Murdstone, though, I thought, not with a
very ready or gracious assent.  'And it certainly might have been,
as you say, a better and happier thing for my brother if he had
never entered into such a marriage.  I have always been of that
opinion.'

'I have no doubt you have,' said my aunt.  'Janet,' ringing the
bell, 'my compliments to Mr. Dick, and beg him to come down.'

Until he came, my aunt sat perfectly upright and stiff, frowning at
the wall.  When he came, my aunt performed the ceremony of
introduction.

'Mr. Dick.  An old and intimate friend.  On whose judgement,' said
my aunt, with emphasis, as an admonition to Mr. Dick, who was
biting his forefinger and looking rather foolish, 'I rely.'

Mr. Dick took his finger out of his mouth, on this hint, and stood
among the group, with a grave and attentive expression of face.

My aunt inclined her head to Mr. Murdstone, who went on:

'Miss Trotwood: on the receipt of your letter, I considered it an
act of greater justice to myself, and perhaps of more respect to
you-'

'Thank you,' said my aunt, still eyeing him keenly.  'You needn't
mind me.'

'To answer it in person, however inconvenient the journey,' pursued
Mr. Murdstone, 'rather than by letter.  This unhappy boy who has
run away from his friends and his occupation -'

'And whose appearance,' interposed his sister, directing general
attention to me in my indefinable costume, 'is perfectly scandalous
and disgraceful.'

'Jane Murdstone,' said her brother, 'have the goodness not to
interrupt me.  This unhappy boy, Miss Trotwood, has been the
occasion of much domestic trouble and uneasiness; both during the
lifetime of my late dear wife, and since.  He has a sullen,
rebellious spirit; a violent temper; and an untoward, intractable
disposition.  Both my sister and myself have endeavoured to correct
his vices, but ineffectually.  And I have felt - we both have felt,
I may say; my sister being fully in my confidence - that it is
right you should receive this grave and dispassionate assurance
from our lips.'

'It can hardly be necessary for me to confirm anything stated by my
brother,' said Miss Murdstone; 'but I beg to observe, that, of all
the boys in the world, I believe this is the worst boy.'

'Strong!' said my aunt, shortly.

'But not at all too strong for the facts,' returned Miss Murdstone.

'Ha!' said my aunt.  'Well, sir?'

'I have my own opinions,' resumed Mr. Murdstone, whose face
darkened more and more, the more he and my aunt observed each
other, which they did very narrowly, 'as to the best mode of
bringing him up; they are founded, in part, on my knowledge of him,
and in part on my knowledge of my own means and resources.  I am
responsible for them to myself, I act upon them, and I say no more
about them.  It is enough that I place this boy under the eye of a
friend of my own, in a respectable business; that it does not
please him; that he runs away from it; makes himself a common
vagabond about the country; and comes here, in rags, to appeal to
you, Miss Trotwood.  I wish to set before you, honourably, the
exact consequences - so far as they are within my knowledge - of
your abetting him in this appeal.'

'But about the respectable business first,' said my aunt.  'If he
had been your own boy, you would have put him to it, just the same,
I suppose?'

'If he had been my brother's own boy,' returned Miss Murdstone,
striking in, 'his character, I trust, would have been altogether
different.'

'Or if the poor child, his mother, had been alive, he would still
have gone into the respectable business, would he?' said my aunt.

'I believe,' said Mr. Murdstone, with an inclination of his head,
'that Clara would have disputed nothing which myself and my sister
Jane Murdstone were agreed was for the best.'

Miss Murdstone confirmed this with an audible murmur.

'Humph!' said my aunt.  'Unfortunate baby!'

Mr. Dick, who had been rattling his money all this time, was
rattling it so loudly now, that my aunt felt it necessary to check
him with a look, before saying:

'The poor child's annuity died with her?'

'Died with her,' replied Mr. Murdstone.

'And there was no settlement of the little property - the house and
garden - the what's-its-name Rookery without any rooks in it - upon
her boy?'

'It had been left to her, unconditionally, by her first husband,'
Mr. Murdstone began, when my aunt caught him up with the greatest
irascibility and impatience.

'Good Lord, man, there's no occasion to say that.  Left to her
unconditionally!  I think I see David Copperfield looking forward
to any condition of any sort or kind, though it stared him
point-blank in the face!  Of course it was left to her
unconditionally.  But when she married again - when she took that
most disastrous step of marrying you, in short,' said my aunt, 'to
be plain - did no one put in a word for the boy at that time?'

'My late wife loved her second husband, ma'am,' said Mr. Murdstone,
'and trusted implicitly in him.'

'Your late wife, sir, was a most unworldly, most unhappy, most
unfortunate baby,' returned my aunt, shaking her head at him. 
'That's what she was.  And now, what have you got to say next?'

'Merely this, Miss Trotwood,' he returned.  'I am here to take
David back - to take him back unconditionally, to dispose of him as
I think proper, and to deal with him as I think right.  I am not
here to make any promise, or give any pledge to anybody.  You may
possibly have some idea, Miss Trotwood, of abetting him in his
running away, and in his complaints to you.  Your manner, which I
must say does not seem intended to propitiate, induces me to think
it possible.  Now I must caution you that if you abet him once, you
abet him for good and all; if you step in between him and me, now,
you must step in, Miss Trotwood, for ever.  I cannot trifle, or be
trifled with.  I am here, for the first and last time, to take him
away.  Is he ready to go?  If he is not - and you tell me he is
not; on any pretence; it is indifferent to me what - my doors are
shut against him henceforth, and yours, I take it for granted, are
open to him.'

To this address, my aunt had listened with the closest attention,
sitting perfectly upright, with her hands folded on one knee, and
looking grimly on the speaker.  When he had finished, she turned
her eyes so as to command Miss Murdstone, without otherwise
disturbing her attitude, and said:

'Well, ma'am, have YOU got anything to remark?'

'Indeed, Miss Trotwood,' said Miss Murdstone, 'all that I could say
has been so well said by my brother, and all that I know to be the
fact has been so plainly stated by him, that I have nothing to add
except my thanks for your politeness.  For your very great
politeness, I am sure,' said Miss Murdstone; with an irony which no
more affected my aunt, than it discomposed the cannon I had slept
by at Chatham.

'And what does the boy say?' said my aunt.  'Are you ready to go,
David?'

I answered no, and entreated her not to let me go.  I said that
neither Mr. nor Miss Murdstone had ever liked me, or had ever been
kind to me.  That they had made my mama, who always loved me
dearly, unhappy about me, and that I knew it well, and that
Peggotty knew it.  I said that I had been more miserable than I
thought anybody could believe, who only knew how young I was.  And
I begged and prayed my aunt - I forget in what terms now, but I
remember that they affected me very much then - to befriend and
protect me, for my father's sake.

'Mr. Dick,' said my aunt, 'what shall I do with this child?'

Mr. Dick considered, hesitated, brightened, and rejoined, 'Have him
measured for a suit of clothes directly.'

'Mr. Dick,' said my aunt triumphantly, 'give me your hand, for your
common sense is invaluable.'  Having shaken it with great
cordiality, she pulled me towards her and said to Mr. Murdstone:

'You can go when you like; I'll take my chance with the boy.  If
he's all you say he is, at least I can do as much for him then, as
you have done.  But I don't believe a word of it.'

'Miss Trotwood,' rejoined Mr. Murdstone, shrugging his shoulders,
as he rose, 'if you were a gentleman -'

'Bah!  Stuff and nonsense!' said my aunt.  'Don't talk to me!'

'How exquisitely polite!' exclaimed Miss Murdstone, rising. 
'Overpowering, really!'

'Do you think I don't know,' said my aunt, turning a deaf ear to
the sister, and continuing to address the brother, and to shake her
head at him with infinite expression, 'what kind of life you must
have led that poor, unhappy, misdirected baby?  Do you think I
don't know what a woeful day it was for the soft little creature
when you first came in her way - smirking and making great eyes at
her, I'll be bound, as if you couldn't say boh! to a goose!'

'I never heard anything so elegant!' said Miss Murdstone.

'Do you think I can't understand you as well as if I had seen you,'
pursued my aunt, 'now that I DO see and hear you - which, I tell
you candidly, is anything but a pleasure to me?  Oh yes, bless us!
who so smooth and silky as Mr. Murdstone at first!  The poor,
benighted innocent had never seen such a man.  He was made of
sweetness.  He worshipped her.  He doted on her boy - tenderly
doted on him!  He was to be another father to him, and they were
all to live together in a garden of roses, weren't they?  Ugh!  Get
along with you, do!' said my aunt.

'I never heard anything like this person in my life!' exclaimed
Miss Murdstone.

'And when you had made sure of the poor little fool,' said my aunt
- 'God forgive me that I should call her so, and she gone where YOU
won't go in a hurry - because you had not done wrong enough to her
and hers, you must begin to train her, must you? begin to break
her, like a poor caged bird, and wear her deluded life away, in
teaching her to sing YOUR notes?'

'This is either insanity or intoxication,' said Miss Murdstone, in
a perfect agony at not being able to turn the current of my aunt's
address towards herself; 'and my suspicion is that it's
intoxication.'

Miss Betsey, without taking the least notice of the interruption,
continued to address herself to Mr. Murdstone as if there had been
no such thing.

'Mr. Murdstone,' she said, shaking her finger at him, 'you were a
tyrant to the simple baby, and you broke her heart.  She was a
loving baby - I know that; I knew it, years before you ever saw her
- and through the best part of her weakness you gave her the wounds
she died of.  There is the truth for your comfort, however you like
it.  And you and your instruments may make the most of it.'

'Allow me to inquire, Miss Trotwood,' interposed Miss Murdstone,
'whom you are pleased to call, in a choice of words in which I am
not experienced, my brother's instruments?'

'It was clear enough, as I have told you, years before YOU ever saw
her - and why, in the mysterious dispensations of Providence, you
ever did see her, is more than humanity can comprehend - it was
clear enough that the poor soft little thing would marry somebody,
at some time or other; but I did hope it wouldn't have been as bad
as it has turned out.  That was the time, Mr. Murdstone, when she
gave birth to her boy here,' said my aunt; 'to the poor child you
sometimes tormented her through afterwards, which is a disagreeable
remembrance and makes the sight of him odious now.  Aye, aye! you
needn't wince!' said my aunt.  'I know it's true without that.'

He had stood by the door, all this while, observant of her with a
smile upon his face, though his black eyebrows were heavily
contracted.  I remarked now, that, though the smile was on his face
still, his colour had gone in a moment, and he seemed to breathe as
if he had been running.

'Good day, sir,' said my aunt, 'and good-bye!  Good day to you,
too, ma'am,' said my aunt, turning suddenly upon his sister.  'Let
me see you ride a donkey over my green again, and as sure as you
have a head upon your shoulders, I'll knock your bonnet off, and
tread upon it!'

It would require a painter, and no common painter too, to depict my
aunt's face as she delivered herself of this very unexpected
sentiment, and Miss Murdstone's face as she heard it.  But the
manner of the speech, no less than the matter, was so fiery, that
Miss Murdstone, without a word in answer, discreetly put her arm
through her brother's, and walked haughtily out of the cottage; my
aunt remaining in the window looking after them; prepared, I have
no doubt, in case of the donkey's reappearance, to carry her threat
into instant execution.

No attempt at defiance being made, however, her face gradually
relaxed, and became so pleasant, that I was emboldened to kiss and
thank her; which I did with great heartiness, and with both my arms
clasped round her neck.  I then shook hands with Mr. Dick, who
shook hands with me a great many times, and hailed this happy close
of the proceedings with repeated bursts of laughter.

'You'll consider yourself guardian, jointly with me, of this child,
Mr. Dick,' said my aunt.

'I shall be delighted,' said Mr. Dick, 'to be the guardian of
David's son.'

'Very good,' returned my aunt, 'that's settled.  I have been
thinking, do you know, Mr. Dick, that I might call him Trotwood?'

'Certainly, certainly.  Call him Trotwood, certainly,' said Mr.
Dick.  'David's son's Trotwood.'

'Trotwood Copperfield, you mean,' returned my aunt.

'Yes, to be sure.  Yes.  Trotwood Copperfield,' said Mr. Dick, a
little abashed.

My aunt took so kindly to the notion, that some ready-made clothes,
which were purchased for me that afternoon, were marked 'Trotwood
Copperfield', in her own handwriting, and in indelible marking-ink,
before I put them on; and it was settled that all the other clothes
which were ordered to be made for me (a complete outfit was bespoke
that afternoon) should be marked in the same way.

Thus I began my new life, in a new name, and with everything new
about me.  Now that the state of doubt was over, I felt, for many
days, like one in a dream.  I never thought that I had a curious
couple of guardians, in my aunt and Mr. Dick.  I never thought of
anything about myself, distinctly.  The two things clearest in my
mind were, that a remoteness had come upon the old Blunderstone
life - which seemed to lie in the haze of an immeasurable distance;
and that a curtain had for ever fallen on my life at Murdstone and
Grinby's.  No one has ever raised that curtain since.  I have
lifted it for a moment, even in this narrative, with a reluctant
hand, and dropped it gladly.  The remembrance of that life is
fraught with so much pain to me, with so much mental suffering and
want of hope, that I have never had the courage even to examine how
long I was doomed to lead it.  Whether it lasted for a year, or
more, or less, I do not know.  I only know that it was, and ceased
to be; and that I have written, and there I leave it.

CHAPTER 15
I MAKE ANOTHER BEGINNING

Mr. Dick and I soon became the best of friends, and very often,
when his day's work was done, went out together to fly the great
kite.  Every day of his life he had a long sitting at the Memorial,
which never made the least progress, however hard he laboured, for
King Charles the First always strayed into it, sooner or later, and
then it was thrown aside, and another one begun.  The patience and
hope with which he bore these perpetual disappointments, the mild
perception he had that there was something wrong about King Charles
the First, the feeble efforts he made to keep him out, and the
certainty with which he came in, and tumbled the Memorial out of
all shape, made a deep impression on me.  What Mr. Dick supposed
would come of the Memorial, if it were completed; where he thought
it was to go, or what he thought it was to do; he knew no more than
anybody else, I believe.  Nor was it at all necessary that he
should trouble himself with such questions, for if anything were
certain under the sun, it was certain that the Memorial never would
be finished.  It was quite an affecting sight, I used to think, to
see him with the kite when it was up a great height in the air. 
What he had told me, in his room, about his belief in its
disseminating the statements pasted on it, which were nothing but
old leaves of abortive Memorials, might have been a fancy with him
sometimes; but not when he was out, looking up at the kite in the
sky, and feeling it pull and tug at his hand.  He never looked so
serene as he did then.  I used to fancy, as I sat by him of an
evening, on a green slope, and saw him watch the kite high in the
quiet air, that it lifted his mind out of its confusion, and bore
it (such was my boyish thought) into the skies.  As he wound the
string in and it came lower and lower down out of the beautiful
light, until it fluttered to the ground, and lay there like a dead
thing, he seemed to wake gradually out of a dream; and I remember
to have seen him take it up, and look about him in a lost way, as
if they had both come down together, so that I pitied him with all
my heart.

While I advanced in friendship and intimacy with Mr. Dick, I did
not go backward in the favour of his staunch friend, my aunt.  She
took so kindly to me, that, in the course of a few weeks, she
shortened my adopted name of Trotwood into Trot; and even
encouraged me to hope, that if I went on as I had begun, I might
take equal rank in her affections with my sister Betsey Trotwood.

'Trot,' said my aunt one evening, when the backgammon-board was
placed as usual for herself and Mr. Dick, 'we must not forget your
education.'

This was my only subject of anxiety, and I felt quite delighted by
her referring to it.

'Should you like to go to school at Canterbury?' said my aunt.

I replied that I should like it very much, as it was so near her.

'Good,' said my aunt.  'Should you like to go tomorrow?'

Being already no stranger to the general rapidity of my aunt's
evolutions, I was not surprised by the suddenness of the proposal,
and said: 'Yes.'

'Good,' said my aunt again.  'Janet, hire the grey pony and chaise
tomorrow morning at ten o'clock, and pack up Master Trotwood's
clothes tonight.'

I was greatly elated by these orders; but my heart smote me for my
selfishness, when I witnessed their effect on Mr. Dick, who was so
low-spirited at the prospect of our separation, and played so ill
in consequence, that my aunt, after giving him several admonitory
raps on the knuckles with her dice-box, shut up the board, and
declined to play with him any more.  But, on hearing from my aunt
that I should sometimes come over on a Saturday, and that he could
sometimes come and see me on a Wednesday, he revived; and vowed to
make another kite for those occasions, of proportions greatly
surpassing the present one.  In the morning he was downhearted
again, and would have sustained himself by giving me all the money
he had in his possession, gold and silver too, if my aunt had not
interposed, and limited the gift to five shillings, which, at his
earnest petition, were afterwards increased to ten.  We parted at
the garden-gate in a most affectionate manner, and Mr. Dick did not
go into the house until my aunt had driven me out of sight of it.

My aunt, who was perfectly indifferent to public opinion, drove the
grey pony through Dover in a masterly manner; sitting high and
stiff like a state coachman, keeping a steady eye upon him wherever
he went, and making a point of not letting him have his own way in
any respect.  When we came into the country road, she permitted him
to relax a little, however; and looking at me down in a valley of
cushion by her side, asked me whether I was happy?

'Very happy indeed, thank you, aunt,' I said.

She was much gratified; and both her hands being occupied, patted
me on the head with her whip.

'Is it a large school, aunt?' I asked.

'Why, I don't know,' said my aunt.  'We are going to Mr.
Wickfield's first.'

'Does he keep a school?' I asked.

'No, Trot,' said my aunt.  'He keeps an office.'

I asked for no more information about Mr. Wickfield, as she offered
none, and we conversed on other subjects until we came to
Canterbury, where, as it was market-day, my aunt had a great
opportunity of insinuating the grey pony among carts, baskets,
vegetables, and huckster's goods.  The hair-breadth turns and
twists we made, drew down upon us a variety of speeches from the
people standing about, which were not always complimentary; but my
aunt drove on with perfect indifference, and I dare say would have
taken her own way with as much coolness through an enemy's country.

At length we stopped before a very old house bulging out over the
road; a house with long low lattice-windows bulging out still
farther, and beams with carved heads on the ends bulging out too,
so that I fancied the whole house was leaning forward, trying to
see who was passing on the narrow pavement below.  It was quite
spotless in its cleanliness.  The old-fashioned brass knocker on
the low arched door, ornamented with carved garlands of fruit and
flowers, twinkled like a star; the two stone steps descending to
the door were as white as if they had been covered with fair linen;
and all the angles and corners, and carvings and mouldings, and
quaint little panes of glass, and quainter little windows, though
as old as the hills, were as pure as any snow that ever fell upon
the hills.

When the pony-chaise stopped at the door, and my eyes were intent
upon the house, I saw a cadaverous face appear at a small window on
the ground floor (in a little round tower that formed one side of
the house), and quickly disappear.  The low arched door then
opened, and the face came out.  It was quite as cadaverous as it
had looked in the window, though in the grain of it there was that
tinge of red which is sometimes to be observed in the skins of
red-haired people.  It belonged to a red-haired person - a youth of
fifteen, as I take it now, but looking much older - whose hair was
cropped as close as the closest stubble; who had hardly any
eyebrows, and no eyelashes, and eyes of a red-brown, so unsheltered
and unshaded, that I remember wondering how he went to sleep.  He
was high-shouldered and bony; dressed in decent black, with a white
wisp of a neckcloth; buttoned up to the throat; and had a long,
lank, skeleton hand, which particularly attracted my attention, as
he stood at the pony's head, rubbing his chin with it, and looking
up at us in the chaise.

'Is Mr. Wickfield at home, Uriah Heep?' said my aunt.

'Mr. Wickfield's at home, ma'am,' said Uriah Heep, 'if you'll
please to walk in there' - pointing with his long hand to the room
he meant.

We got out; and leaving him to hold the pony, went into a long low
parlour looking towards the street, from the window of which I
caught a glimpse, as I went in, of Uriah Heep breathing into the
pony's nostrils, and immediately covering them with his hand, as if
he were putting some spell upon him.  Opposite to the tall old
chimney-piece were two portraits: one of a gentleman with grey hair
(though not by any means an old man) and black eyebrows, who was
looking over some papers tied together with red tape; the other, of
a lady, with a very placid and sweet expression of face, who was
looking at me.

I believe I was turning about in search of Uriah's picture, when,
a door at the farther end of the room opening, a gentleman entered,
at sight of whom I turned to the first-mentioned portrait again, to
make quite sure that it had not come out of its frame.  But it was
stationary; and as the gentleman advanced into the light, I saw
that he was some years older than when he had had his picture
painted.

'Miss Betsey Trotwood,' said the gentleman, 'pray walk in.  I was
engaged for a moment, but you'll excuse my being busy.  You know my
motive.  I have but one in life.'


CHAPTER I - THE DAWN

AN ancient English Cathedral Tower?  How can the ancient English 
Cathedral tower be here!  The well-known massive gray square tower 
of its old Cathedral?  How can that be here!  There is no spike of 
rusty iron in the air, between the eye and it, from any point of 
the real prospect.  What is the spike that intervenes, and who has 
set it up?  Maybe it is set up by the Sultan's orders for the 
impaling of a horde of Turkish robbers, one by one.  It is so, for 
cymbals clash, and the Sultan goes by to his palace in long 
procession.  Ten thousand scimitars flash in the sunlight, and 
thrice ten thousand dancing-girls strew flowers.  Then, follow 
white elephants caparisoned in countless gorgeous colours, and 
infinite in number and attendants.  Still the Cathedral Tower rises 
in the background, where it cannot be, and still no writhing figure 
is on the grim spike.  Stay!  Is the spike so low a thing as the 
rusty spike on the top of a post of an old bedstead that has 
tumbled all awry?  Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be 
devoted to the consideration of this possibility.

Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness 
has thus fantastically pieced itself together, at length rises, 
supports his trembling frame upon his arms, and looks around.  He 
is in the meanest and closest of small rooms.  Through the ragged 
window-curtain, the light of early day steals in from a miserable 
court.  He lies, dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a 
bedstead that has indeed given way under the weight upon it. Lying, 
also dressed and also across the bed, not longwise, are a Chinaman, 
a Lascar, and a haggard woman.  The two first are in a sleep or 
stupor; the last is blowing at a kind of pipe, to kindle it.  And 
as she blows, and shading it with her lean hand, concentrates its 
red spark of light, it serves in the dim morning as a lamp to show 
him what he sees of her.

'Another?' says this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper.  
'Have another?'

He looks about him, with his hand to his forehead.

'Ye've smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight,' the 
woman goes on, as she chronically complains.  'Poor me, poor me, my 
head is so bad.  Them two come in after ye.  Ah, poor me, the 
business is slack, is slack!  Few Chinamen about the Docks, and 
fewer Lascars, and no ships coming in, these say!  Here's another 
ready for ye, deary.  Ye'll remember like a good soul, won't ye, 
that the market price is dreffle high just now?  More nor three 
shillings and sixpence for a thimbleful!  And ye'll remember that 
nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t'other side the court; but he 
can't do it as well as me) has the true secret of mixing it?  Ye'll 
pay up accordingly, deary, won't ye?'

She blows at the pipe as she speaks, and, occasionally bubbling at 
it, inhales much of its contents.

'O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad!  It's nearly ready 
for ye, deary.  Ah, poor me, poor me, my poor hand shakes like to 
drop off!  I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, "I'll 
have another ready for him, and he'll bear in mind the market price 
of opium, and pay according."  O my poor head!  I makes my pipes of 
old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary - this is one - and I fits-in 
a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble 
with this little horn spoon; and so I fills, deary.  Ah, my poor 
nerves!  I got Heavens-hard drunk for sixteen year afore I took to 
this; but this don't hurt me, not to speak of.  And it takes away 
the hunger as well as wittles, deary.'

She hands him the nearly-emptied pipe, and sinks back, turning over 
on her face.

He rises unsteadily from the bed, lays the pipe upon the hearth-
stone, draws back the ragged curtain, and looks with repugnance at 
his three companions.  He notices that the woman has opium-smoked 
herself into a strange likeness of the Chinaman.  His form of 
cheek, eye, and temple, and his colour, are repeated in her.  Said 
Chinaman convulsively wrestles with one of his many Gods or Devils, 
perhaps, and snarls horribly.  The Lascar laughs and dribbles at 
the mouth.  The hostess is still.

'What visions can SHE have?' the waking man muses, as he turns her 
face towards him, and stands looking down at it.  'Visions of many 
butchers' shops, and public-houses, and much credit?  Of an 
increase of hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set 
upright again, and this horrible court swept clean?  What can she 
rise to, under any quantity of opium, higher than that! - Eh?'

He bends down his ear, to listen to her mutterings.

'Unintelligible!'

As he watches the spasmodic shoots and darts that break out of her 
face and limbs, like fitful lightning out of a dark sky, some 
contagion in them seizes upon him:  insomuch that he has to 
withdraw himself to a lean arm-chair by the hearth - placed there, 
perhaps, for such emergencies - and to sit in it, holding tight, 
until he has got the better of this unclean spirit of imitation.

Then he comes back, pounces on the Chinaman, and seizing him with 
both hands by the throat, turns him violently on the bed.  The 
Chinaman clutches the aggressive hands, resists, gasps, and 
protests.

'What do you say?'

A watchful pause.

'Unintelligible!'

Slowly loosening his grasp as he listens to the incoherent jargon 
with an attentive frown, he turns to the Lascar and fairly drags 
him forth upon the floor.  As he falls, the Lascar starts into a 
half-risen attitude, glares with his eyes, lashes about him 
fiercely with his arms, and draws a phantom knife.  It then becomes 
apparent that the woman has taken possession of this knife, for 
safety's sake; for, she too starting up, and restraining and 
expostulating with him, the knife is visible in her dress, not in 
his, when they drowsily drop back, side by side.

There has been chattering and clattering enough between them, but 
to no purpose.  When any distinct word has been flung into the air, 
it has had no sense or sequence.  Wherefore 'unintelligible!' is 
again the comment of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding 
of his head, and a gloomy smile.  He then lays certain silver money 
on the table, finds his hat, gropes his way down the broken stairs, 
gives a good morning to some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a 
black hutch beneath the stairs, and passes out.

That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old 
Cathedral rises before the sight of a jaded traveller.  The bells 
are going for daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, 
one would say, from his haste to reach the open Cathedral door.  
The choir are getting on their sullied white robes, in a hurry, 
when he arrives among them, gets on his own robe, and falls into 
the procession filing in to service.  Then, the Sacristan locks the 
iron-barred gates that divide the sanctuary from the chancel, and 
all of the procession having scuttled into their places, hide their 
faces; and then the intoned words, 'WHEN THE WICKED MAN - ' rise 
among groins of arches and beams of roof, awakening muttered 
thunder.

CHAPTER II - A DEAN, AND A CHAPTER ALSO

WHOSOEVER has observed that sedate and clerical bird, the rook, may 
perhaps have noticed that when he wings his way homeward towards 
nightfall, in a sedate and clerical company, two rooks will 
suddenly detach themselves from the rest, will retrace their flight 
for some distance, and will there poise and linger; conveying to 
mere men the fancy that it is of some occult importance to the body 
politic, that this artful couple should pretend to have renounced 
connection with it.

Similarly, service being over in the old Cathedral with the square 
tower, and the choir scuffling out again, and divers venerable 
persons of rook-like aspect dispersing, two of these latter retrace 
their steps, and walk together in the echoing Close.

Not only is the day waning, but the year.  The low sun is fiery and 
yet cold behind the monastery ruin, and the Virginia creeper on the 
Cathedral wall has showered half its deep-red leaves down on the 
pavement.  There has been rain this afternoon, and a wintry shudder 
goes among the little pools on the cracked, uneven flag-stones, and 
through the giant elm-trees as they shed a gust of tears.  Their 
fallen leaves lie strewn thickly about.  Some of these leaves, in a 
timid rush, seek sanctuary within the low arched Cathedral door; 
but two men coming out resist them, and cast them forth again with 
their feet; this done, one of the two locks the door with a goodly 
key, and the other flits away with a folio music-book.

'Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?'

'Yes, Mr. Dean.'

'He has stayed late.'

'Yes, Mr. Dean.  I have stayed for him, your Reverence.  He has 
been took a little poorly.'

'Say "taken," Tope - to the Dean,' the younger rook interposes in a 
low tone with this touch of correction, as who should say:  'You 
may offer bad grammar to the laity, or the humbler clergy, not to 
the Dean.'

Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, and accustomed to be high with 
excursion parties, declines with a silent loftiness to perceive 
that any suggestion has been tendered to him.

'And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken - for, as Mr. 
Crisparkle has remarked, it is better to say taken - taken - ' 
repeats the Dean; 'when and how has Mr. Jasper been Taken - '

'Taken, sir,' Tope deferentially murmurs.

' - Poorly, Tope?'

'Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed - '

'I wouldn't say "That breathed," Tope,' Mr. Crisparkle interposes 
with the same touch as before.  'Not English - to the Dean.'

'Breathed to that extent,' the Dean (not unflattered by this 
indirect homage) condescendingly remarks, 'would be preferable.'

'Mr. Jasper's breathing was so remarkably short' - thus discreetly 
does Mr. Tope work his way round the sunken rock - 'when he came 
in, that it distressed him mightily to get his notes out:  which 
was perhaps the cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a 
little.  His memory grew DAZED.'  Mr. Tope, with his eyes on the 
Reverend Mr. Crisparkle, shoots this word out, as defying him to 
improve upon it:  'and a dimness and giddiness crept over him as 
strange as ever I saw:  though he didn't seem to mind it 
particularly, himself.  However, a little time and a little water 
brought him out of his DAZE.'  Mr. Tope repeats the word and its 
emphasis, with the air of saying:  'As I HAVE made a success, I'll 
make it again.'

'And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?' asked the 
Dean.

'Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself.  And I'm glad to 
see he's having his fire kindled up, for it's chilly after the wet, 
and the Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this 
afternoon, and he was very shivery.'

They all three look towards an old stone gatehouse crossing the 
Close, with an arched thoroughfare passing beneath it.  Through its 
latticed window, a fire shines out upon the fast-darkening scene, 
involving in shadow the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering 
the building's front.  As the deep Cathedral-bell strikes the hour, 
a ripple of wind goes through these at their distance, like a 
ripple of the solemn sound that hums through tomb and tower, broken 
niche and defaced statue, in the pile close at hand.

'Is Mr. Jasper's nephew with him?' the Dean asks.

'No, sir,' replied the Verger, 'but expected.  There's his own 
solitary shadow betwixt his two windows - the one looking this way, 
and the one looking down into the High Street - drawing his own 
curtains now.'

'Well, well,' says the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up 
the little conference, 'I hope Mr. Jasper's heart may not be too 
much set upon his nephew.  Our affections, however laudable, in 
this transitory world, should never master us; we should guide 
them, guide them.  I find I am not disagreeably reminded of my 
dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell.  Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you 
will, before going home, look in on Jasper?'

'Certainly, Mr. Dean.  And tell him that you had the kindness to 
desire to know how he was?'

'Ay; do so, do so.  Certainly.  Wished to know how he was.  By all 
means.  Wished to know how he was.'

With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocks his 
quaint hat as a Dean in good spirits may, and directs his comely 
gaiters towards the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick 
house where he is at present, 'in residence' with Mrs. Dean and 
Miss Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually 
pitching himself head-foremost into all the deep running water in 
the surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser, 
musical, classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, 
contented, and boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon and good man, 
lately 'Coach' upon the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted 
by a patron (grateful for a well-taught son) to his present 
Christian beat; betakes himself to the gatehouse, on his way home 
to his early tea.

'Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper.'

'O, it was nothing, nothing!'

'You look a little worn.'

'Do I?  O, I don't think so.  What is better, I don't feel so.  
Tope has made too much of it, I suspect.  It's his trade to make 
the most of everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know.'

'I may tell the Dean - I call expressly from the Dean - that you 
are all right again?'

The reply, with a slight smile, is:  'Certainly; with my respects 
and thanks to the Dean.'

'I'm glad to hear that you expect young Drood.'

'I expect the dear fellow every moment.'

'Ah!  He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper.'

'More good than a dozen doctors.  For I love him dearly, and I 
don't love doctors, or doctors' stuff.'

Mr. Jasper is a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, 
lustrous, well-arranged black hair and whiskers.  He looks older 
than he is, as dark men often do.  His voice is deep and good, his 
face and figure are good, his manner is a little sombre.  His room 
is a little sombre, and may have had its influence in forming his 
manner.  It is mostly in shadow.  Even when the sun shines 
brilliantly, it seldom touches the grand piano in the recess, or 
the folio music-books on the stand, or the book-shelves on the 
wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming schoolgirl hanging 
over the chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied with a blue 
riband, and her beauty remarkable for a quite childish, almost 
babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of itself.  
(There is not the least artistic merit in this picture, which is a 
mere daub; but it is clear that the painter has made it humorously 
- one might almost say, revengefully - like the original.)

'We shall miss you, Jasper, at the "Alternate Musical Wednesdays" 
to-night; but no doubt you are best at home.  Good-night.  God 
bless you!  "Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, have 
you seen (have you seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Flo-
o-ora-a pass this way!"'  Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend 
Septimus Crisparkle thus delivers himself, in musical rhythm, as he 
withdraws his amiable face from the doorway and conveys it down-
stairs.

Sounds of recognition and greeting pass between the Reverend 
Septimus and somebody else, at the stair-foot.  Mr. Jasper listens, 
starts from his chair, and catches a young fellow in his arms, 
exclaiming:

'My dear Edwin!'

'My dear Jack!  So glad to see you!'

'Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own 
corner.  Your feet are not wet?  Pull your boots off.  Do pull your 
boots off.'

'My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone.  Don't moddley-coddley, 
there's a good fellow.  I like anything better than being moddley-
coddleyed.'

With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a 
genial outburst of enthusiasm, Mr. Jasper stands still, and looks 
on intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward 
coat, hat, gloves, and so forth.  Once for all, a look of 
intentness and intensity - a look of hungry, exacting, watchful, 
and yet devoted affection - is always, now and ever afterwards, on 
the Jasper face whenever the Jasper face is addressed in this 
direction.  And whenever it is so addressed, it is never, on this 
occasion or on any other, dividedly addressed; it is always 
concentrated.

'Now I am right, and now I'll take my corner, Jack.  Any dinner, 
Jack?'

Mr. Jasper opens a door at the upper end of the room, and discloses 
a small inner room pleasantly lighted and prepared, wherein a 
comely dame is in the act of setting dishes on table.

'What a jolly old Jack it is!' cries the young fellow, with a clap 
of his hands.  'Look here, Jack; tell me; whose birthday is it?'

'Not yours, I know,' Mr. Jasper answers, pausing to consider.

'Not mine, you know?  No; not mine, I know!  Pussy's!'

Fixed as the look the young fellow meets, is, there is yet in it 
some strange power of suddenly including the sketch over the 
chimneypiece.

'Pussy's, Jack!  We must drink Many happy returns to her.  Come, 
uncle; take your dutiful and sharp-set nephew in to dinner.'

As the boy (for he is little more) lays a hand on Jasper's 
shoulder, Jasper cordially and gaily lays a hand on HIS shoulder, 
and so Marseillaise-wise they go in to dinner.

'And, Lord! here's Mrs. Tope!' cries the boy.  'Lovelier than 
ever!'

'Never you mind me, Master Edwin,' retorts the Verger's wife; 'I 
can take care of myself.'

'You can't.  You're much too handsome.  Give me a kiss because it's 
Pussy's birthday.'

'I'd Pussy you, young man, if I was Pussy, as you call her,' Mrs. 
Tope blushingly retorts, after being saluted.  'Your uncle's too 
much wrapt up in you, that's where it is.  He makes so much of you, 
that it's my opinion you think you've only to call your Pussys by 
the dozen, to make 'em come.'

'You forget, Mrs. Tope,' Mr. Jasper interposes, taking his place at 
the table with a genial smile, 'and so do you, Ned, that Uncle and 
Nephew are words prohibited here by common consent and express 
agreement.  For what we are going to receive His holy name be 
praised!'

'Done like the Dean!  Witness, Edwin Drood!  Please to carve, Jack, 
for I can't.'

This sally ushers in the dinner.  Little to the present purpose, or 
to any purpose, is said, while it is in course of being disposed 
of.  At length the cloth is drawn, and a dish of walnuts and a 
decanter of rich-coloured sherry are placed upon the table.

'I say!  Tell me, Jack,' the young fellow then flows on:  'do you 
really and truly feel as if the mention of our relationship divided 
us at all?  I don't.'

'Uncles as a rule, Ned, are so much older than their nephews,' is 
the reply, 'that I have that feeling instinctively.'

'As a rule!  Ah, may-be!  But what is a difference in age of half-
a-dozen years or so? And some uncles, in large families, are even 
younger than their nephews.  By George, I wish it was the case with 
us!'

'Why?'

'Because if it was, I'd take the lead with you, Jack, and be as 
wise as Begone, dull Care! that turned a young man gray, and 
Begone, dull Care! that turned an old man to clay. - Halloa, Jack!  
Don't drink.'

'Why not?'

'Asks why not, on Pussy's birthday, and no Happy returns proposed!  
Pussy, Jack, and many of 'em!  Happy returns, I mean.'

Laying an affectionate and laughing touch on the boy's extended 
hand, as if it were at once his giddy head and his light heart, Mr. 
Jasper drinks the toast in silence.

'Hip, hip, hip, and nine times nine, and one to finish with, and 
all that, understood.  Hooray, hooray, hooray! - And now, Jack, 
let's have a little talk about Pussy.  Two pairs of nut-crackers?  
Pass me one, and take the other.'  Crack.  'How's Pussy getting on 
Jack?'

'With her music?  Fairly.'

'What a dreadfully conscientious fellow you are, Jack!  But I know, 
Lord bless you!  Inattentive, isn't she?'

'She can learn anything, if she will.'

'IF she will!  Egad, that's it.  But if she won't?'

Crack! - on Mr. Jasper's part.

'How's she looking, Jack?'

Mr. Jasper's concentrated face again includes the portrait as he 
returns:  'Very like your sketch indeed.'

'I AM a little proud of it,' says the young fellow, glancing up at 
the sketch with complacency, and then shutting one eye, and taking 
a corrected prospect of it over a level bridge of nut-crackers in 
the air:  'Not badly hit off from memory.  But I ought to have 
caught that expression pretty well, for I have seen it often 
enough.'

Crack! - on Edwin Drood's part.

Crack! - on Mr. Jasper's part.

'In point of fact,' the former resumes, after some silent dipping 
among his fragments of walnut with an air of pique, 'I see it 
whenever I go to see Pussy.  If I don't find it on her face, I 
leave it there. - You know I do, Miss Scornful Pert.  Booh!'  With 
a twirl of the nut-crackers at the portrait.

Crack! crack! crack.  Slowly, on Mr. Jasper's part.

Crack.  Sharply on the part of Edwin Drood.

Silence on both sides.

'Have you lost your tongue, Jack?'

'Have you found yours, Ned?'

'No, but really; - isn't it, you know, after all - '

Mr. Jasper lifts his dark eyebrows inquiringly.

'Isn't it unsatisfactory to be cut off from choice in such a 
matter?  There, Jack!  I tell you!  If I could choose, I would 
choose Pussy from all the pretty girls in the world.'

'But you have not got to choose.'

'That's what I complain of.  My dead and gone father and Pussy's 
dead and gone father must needs marry us together by anticipation.  
Why the - Devil, I was going to say, if it had been respectful to 
their memory - couldn't they leave us alone?'

'Tut, tut, dear boy,' Mr. Jasper remonstrates, in a tone of gentle 
deprecation.

'Tut, tut?  Yes, Jack, it's all very well for YOU.  YOU can take it 
easily.  YOUR life is not laid down to scale, and lined and dotted 
out for you, like a surveyor's plan.  YOU have no uncomfortable 
suspicion that you are forced upon anybody, nor has anybody an 
uncomfortable suspicion that she is forced upon you, or that you 
are forced upon her.  YOU can choose for yourself.  Life, for YOU, 
is a plum with the natural bloom on; it hasn't been over-carefully 
wiped off for YOU - '

'Don't stop, dear fellow.  Go on.'

'Can I anyhow have hurt your feelings, Jack?'

'How can you have hurt my feelings?'

'Good Heaven, Jack, you look frightfully ill!  There's a strange 
film come over your eyes.'

Mr. Jasper, with a forced smile, stretches out his right hand, as 
if at once to disarm apprehension and gain time to get better.  
After a while he says faintly:

'I have been taking opium for a pain - an agony - that sometimes 
overcomes me.  The effects of the medicine steal over me like a 
blight or a cloud, and pass.  You see them in the act of passing; 
they will be gone directly.  Look away from me.  They will go all 
the sooner.'

With a scared face the younger man complies by casting his eyes 
downward at the ashes on the hearth.  Not relaxing his own gaze on 
the fire, but rather strengthening it with a fierce, firm grip upon 
his elbow-chair, the elder sits for a few moments rigid, and then, 
with thick drops standing on his forehead, and a sharp catch of his 
breath, becomes as he was before.  On his so subsiding in his 
chair, his nephew gently and assiduously tends him while he quite 
recovers.  When Jasper is restored, he lays a tender hand upon his 
nephew's shoulder, and, in a tone of voice less troubled than the 
purport of his words - indeed with something of raillery or banter 
in  it - thus addresses him:

'There is said to be a hidden skeleton in every house; but you 
thought there was none in mine, dear Ned.'

'Upon my life, Jack, I did think so.  However, when I come to 
consider that even in Pussy's house - if she had one - and in mine 
- if I had one - '

'You were going to say (but that I interrupted you in spite of 
myself) what a quiet life mine is.  No whirl and uproar around me, 
no distracting commerce or calculation, no risk, no change of 
place, myself devoted to the art I pursue, my business my 
pleasure.'

'I really was going to say something of the kind, Jack; but you 
see, you, speaking of yourself, almost necessarily leave out much 
that I should have put in.  For instance:  I should have put in the 
foreground your being so much respected as Lay Precentor, or Lay 
Clerk, or whatever you call it, of this Cathedral; your enjoying 
the reputation of having done such wonders with the choir; your 
choosing your society, and holding such an independent position in 
this queer old place; your gift of teaching (why, even Pussy, who 
don't like being taught, says there never was such a Master as you 
are!), and your connexion.'

'Yes; I saw what you were tending to.  I hate it.'

'Hate it, Jack?'  (Much bewildered.)

'I hate it.  The cramped monotony of my existence grinds me away by 
the grain.  How does our service sound to you?'

'Beautiful!  Quite celestial!'

'It often sounds to me quite devilish.  I am so weary of it.  The 
echoes of my own voice among the arches seem to mock me with my 
daily drudging round.  No wretched monk who droned his life away in 
that gloomy place, before me, can have been more tired of it than I 
am.  He could take for relief (and did take) to carving demons out 
of the stalls and seats and desks.  What shall I do?  Must I take 
to carving them out of my heart?'

'I thought you had so exactly found your niche in life, Jack,' 
Edwin Drood returns, astonished, bending forward in his chair to 
lay a sympathetic hand on Jasper's knee, and looking at him with an 
anxious face.

'I know you thought so.  They all think so.'

'Well, I suppose they do,' says Edwin, meditating aloud.  'Pussy 
thinks so.'

'When did she tell you that?'

'The last time I was here.  You remember when.  Three months ago.'

'How did she phrase it?'

'O, she only said that she had become your pupil, and that you were 
made for your vocation.'

The younger man glances at the portrait.  The elder sees it in him.

'Anyhow, my dear Ned,' Jasper resumes, as he shakes his head with a 
grave cheerfulness, 'I must subdue myself to my vocation:  which is 
much the same thing outwardly.  It's too late to find another now.  
This is a confidence between us.'

'It shall be sacredly preserved, Jack.'

'I have reposed it in you, because - '

'I feel it, I assure you.  Because we are fast friends, and because 
you love and trust me, as I love and trust you.  Both hands, Jack.'

As each stands looking into the other's eyes, and as the uncle 
holds the nephew's hands, the uncle thus proceeds:

'You know now, don't you, that even a poor monotonous chorister and 
grinder of music - in his niche - may be troubled with some stray 
sort of ambition, aspiration, restlessness, dissatisfaction, what 
shall we call it?'

'Yes, dear Jack.'

'And you will remember?'

'My dear Jack, I only ask you, am I likely to forget what you have 
said with so much feeling?'

'Take it as a warning, then.'

In the act of having his hands released, and of moving a step back, 
Edwin pauses for an instant to consider the application of these 
last words.  The instant over, he says, sensibly touched:

'I am afraid I am but a shallow, surface kind of fellow, Jack, and 
that my headpiece is none of the best.  But I needn't say I am 
young; and perhaps I shall not grow worse as I grow older.  At all 
events, I hope I have something impressible within me, which feels 
- deeply feels - the disinterestedness of your painfully laying 
your inner self bare, as a warning to me.'

Mr. Jasper's steadiness of face and figure becomes so marvellous 
that his breathing seems to have stopped.

'I couldn't fail to notice, Jack, that it cost you a great effort, 
and that you were very much moved, and very unlike your usual self.  
Of course I knew that you were extremely fond of me, but I really 
was not prepared for your, as I may say, sacrificing yourself to me 
in that way.'

Mr. Jasper, becoming a breathing man again without the smallest 
stage of transition between the two extreme states, lifts his 
shoulders, laughs, and waves his right arm.

'No; don't put the sentiment away, Jack; please don't; for I am 
very much in earnest.  I have no doubt that that unhealthy state of 
mind which you have so powerfully described is attended with some 
real suffering, and is hard to bear.  But let me reassure you, 
Jack, as to the chances of its overcoming me.  I don't think I am 
in the way of it.  In some few months less than another year, you 
know, I shall carry Pussy off from school as Mrs. Edwin Drood.  I 
shall then go engineering into the East, and Pussy with me.  And 
although we have our little tiffs now, arising out of a certain 
unavoidable flatness that attends our love-making, owing to its end 
being all settled beforehand, still I have no doubt of our getting 
on capitally then, when it's done and can't be helped.  In short, 
Jack, to go back to the old song I was freely quoting at dinner 
(and who knows old songs better than you?), my wife shall dance, 
and I will sing, so merrily pass the day.  Of Pussy's being 
beautiful there cannot be a doubt; - and when you are good besides, 
Little Miss Impudence,' once more apostrophising the portrait, 
'I'll burn your comic likeness, and paint your music-master 
another.'

Mr. Jasper, with his hand to his chin, and with an expression of 
musing benevolence on his face, has attentively watched every 
animated look and gesture attending the delivery of these words.  
He remains in that attitude after they, are spoken, as if in a kind 
of fascination attendant on his strong interest in the youthful 
spirit that he loves so well.  Then he says with a quiet smile:

'You won't be warned, then?'

'No, Jack.'

'You can't be warned, then?'

'No, Jack, not by you.  Besides that I don't really consider myself 
in danger, I don't like your putting yourself in that position.'

'Shall we go and walk in the churchyard?'

'By all means.  You won't mind my slipping out of it for half a 
moment to the Nuns' House, and leaving a parcel there?  Only gloves 
for Pussy; as many pairs of gloves as she is years old to-day.  
Rather poetical, Jack?'

Mr. Jasper, still in the same attitude, murmurs:  '"Nothing half so 
sweet in life," Ned!'

'Here's the parcel in my greatcoat-pocket.  They must be presented 
to-night, or the poetry is gone.  It's against regulations for me 
to call at night, but not to leave a packet.  I am ready, Jack!'

Mr. Jasper dissolves his attitude, and they go out together.

CHAPTER III - THE NUNS' HOUSE

FOR sufficient reasons, which this narrative will itself unfold as 
it advances, a fictitious name must be bestowed upon the old 
Cathedral town.  Let it stand in these pages as Cloisterham.  It 
was once possibly known to the Druids by another name, and 
certainly to the Romans by another, and to the Saxons by another, 
and to the Normans by another; and a name more or less in the 
course of many centuries can be of little moment to its dusty 
chronicles.

An ancient city, Cloisterham, and no meet dwelling-place for any 
one with hankerings after the noisy world.  A monotonous, silent 
city, deriving an earthy flavour throughout from its Cathedral 
crypt, and so abounding in vestiges of monastic graves, that the 
Cloisterham children grow small salad in the dust of abbots and 
abbesses, and make dirt-pies of nuns and friars; while every 
ploughman in its outlying fields renders to once puissant Lord 
Treasurers, Archbishops, Bishops, and such-like, the attention 
which the Ogre in the story-book desired to render to his unbidden 
visitor, and grinds their bones to make his bread.

A drowsy city, Cloisterham, whose inhabitants seem to suppose, with 
an inconsistency more strange than rare, that all its changes lie 
behind it, and that there are no more to come.  A queer moral to 
derive from antiquity, yet older than any traceable antiquity.  So 
silent are the streets of Cloisterham (though prone to echo on the 
smallest provocation), that of a summer-day the sunblinds of its 
shops scarce dare to flap in the south wind; while the sun-browned 
tramps, who pass along and stare, quicken their limp a little, that 
they may the sooner get beyond the confines of its oppressive 
respectability.  This is a feat not difficult of achievement, 
seeing that the streets of Cloisterham city are little more than 
one narrow street by which you get into it and get out of it:  the 
rest being mostly disappointing yards with pumps in them and no 
thoroughfare - exception made of the Cathedral-close, and a paved 
Quaker settlement, in colour and general confirmation very like a 
Quakeress's bonnet, up in a shady corner.

In a word, a city of another and a bygone time is Cloisterham, with 
its hoarse Cathedral-bell, its hoarse rooks hovering about the 
Cathedral tower, its hoarser and less distinct rooks in the stalls 
far beneath.  Fragments of old wall, saint's chapel, chapter-house, 
convent and monastery, have got incongruously or obstructively 
built into many of its houses and gardens, much as kindred jumbled 
notions have become incorporated into many of its citizens' minds.  
All things in it are of the past.  Even its single pawnbroker takes 
in no pledges, nor has he for a long time, but offers vainly an 
unredeemed stock for sale, of which the costlier articles are dim 
and pale old watches apparently in a slow perspiration, tarnished 
sugar-tongs with ineffectual legs, and odd volumes of dismal books.  
The most abundant and the most agreeable evidences of progressing 
life in Cloisterham are the evidences of vegetable life in many 
gardens; even its drooping and despondent little theatre has its 
poor strip of garden, receiving the foul fiend, when he ducks from 
its stage into the infernal regions, among scarlet-beans or oyster-
shells, according to the season of the year.

In the midst of Cloisterham stands the Nuns' House:  a venerable 
brick edifice, whose present appellation is doubtless derived from 
the legend of its conventual uses.  On the trim gate enclosing its 
old courtyard is a resplendent brass plate flashing forth the 
legend:  'Seminary for Young Ladies.  Miss Twinkleton.'  The house-
front is so old and worn, and the brass plate is so shining and 
staring, that the general result has reminded imaginative strangers 
of a battered old beau with a large modern eye-glass stuck in his 
blind eye.

Whether the nuns of yore, being of a submissive rather than a 
stiff-necked generation, habitually bent their contemplative heads 
to avoid collision with the beams in the low ceilings of the many 
chambers of their House; whether they sat in its long low windows 
telling their beads for their mortification, instead of making 
necklaces of them for their adornment; whether they were ever 
walled up alive in odd angles and jutting gables of the building 
for having some ineradicable leaven of busy mother Nature in them 
which has kept the fermenting world alive ever since; these may be 
matters of interest to its haunting ghosts (if any), but constitute 
no item in Miss Twinkleton's half-yearly accounts.  They are 
neither of Miss Twinkleton's inclusive regulars, nor of her extras.  
The lady who undertakes the poetical department of the 
establishment at so much (or so little) a quarter has no pieces in 
her list of recitals bearing on such unprofitable questions.

As, in some cases of drunkenness, and in others of animal 
magnetism, there are two states of consciousness which never clash, 
but each of which pursues its separate course as though it were 
continuous instead of broken (thus, if I hide my watch when I am 
drunk, I must be drunk again before I can remember where), so Miss 
Twinkleton has two distinct and separate phases of being.  Every 
night, the moment the young ladies have retired to rest, does Miss 
Twinkleton smarten up her curls a little, brighten up her eyes a 
little, and become a sprightlier Miss Twinkleton than the young 
ladies have ever seen.  Every night, at the same hour, does Miss 
Twinkleton resume the topics of the previous night, comprehending 
the tenderer scandal of Cloisterham, of which she has no knowledge 
whatever by day, and references to a certain season at Tunbridge 
Wells (airily called by Miss Twinkleton in this state of her 
existence 'The Wells'), notably the season wherein a certain 
finished gentleman (compassionately called by Miss Twinkleton, in 
this stage of her existence, 'Foolish Mr. Porters') revealed a 
homage of the heart, whereof Miss Twinkleton, in her scholastic 
state of existence, is as ignorant as a granite pillar.  Miss 
Twinkleton's companion in both states of existence, and equally 
adaptable to either, is one Mrs. Tisher:  a deferential widow with 
a weak back, a chronic sigh, and a suppressed voice, who looks 
after the young ladies' wardrobes, and leads them to infer that she 
has seen better days.  Perhaps this is the reason why it is an 
article of faith with the servants, handed down from race to race, 
that the departed Tisher was a hairdresser.

The pet pupil of the Nuns' House is Miss Rosa Bud, of course called 
Rosebud; wonderfully pretty, wonderfully childish, wonderfully 
whimsical.  An awkward interest (awkward because romantic) attaches 
to Miss Bud in the minds of the young ladies, on account of its 
being known to them that a husband has been chosen for her by will 
and bequest, and that her guardian is bound down to bestow her on 
that husband when he comes of age.  Miss Twinkleton, in her 
seminarial state of existence, has combated the romantic aspect of 
this destiny by affecting to shake her head over it behind Miss 
Bud's dimpled shoulders, and to brood on the unhappy lot of that 
doomed little victim.  But with no better effect - possibly some 
unfelt touch of foolish Mr. Porters has undermined the endeavour - 
than to evoke from the young ladies an unanimous bedchamber cry of 
'O, what a pretending old thing Miss Twinkleton is, my dear!'

The Nuns' House is never in such a state of flutter as when this 
allotted husband calls to see little Rosebud.  (It is unanimously 
understood by the young ladies that he is lawfully entitled to this 
privilege, and that if Miss Twinkleton disputed it, she would be 
instantly taken up and transported.)  When his ring at the gate-
bell is expected, or takes place, every young lady who can, under 
any pretence, look out of window, looks out of window; while every 
young lady who is 'practising,' practises out of time; and the 
French class becomes so demoralised that the mark goes round as 
briskly as the bottle at a convivial party in the last century.

On the afternoon of the day next after the dinner of two at the 
gatehouse, the bell is rung with the usual fluttering results.

'Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa.'

This is the announcement of the parlour-maid in chief.  Miss 
Twinkleton, with an exemplary air of melancholy on her, turns to 
the sacrifice, and says, 'You may go down, my dear.'  Miss Bud goes 
down, followed by all eyes.

Mr. Edwin Drood is waiting in Miss Twinkleton's own parlour:  a 
dainty room, with nothing more directly scholastic in it than a 
terrestrial and a celestial globe.  These expressive machines imply 
(to parents and guardians) that even when Miss Twinkleton retires 
into the bosom of privacy, duty may at any moment compel her to 
become a sort of Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth and soaring 
through the skies in search of knowledge for her pupils.

The last new maid, who has never seen the young gentleman Miss Rosa 
is engaged to, and who is making his acquaintance between the 
hinges of the open door, left open for the purpose, stumbles 
guiltily down the kitchen stairs, as a charming little apparition, 
with its face concealed by a little silk apron thrown over its 
head, glides into the parlour.

'O! IT IS so ridiculous!' says the apparition, stopping and 
shrinking.  'Don't, Eddy!'

'Don't what, Rosa?'

'Don't come any nearer, please.  It IS so absurd.'

'What is absurd, Rosa?'

'The whole thing is.  It IS so absurd to be an engaged orphan and 
it IS so absurd to have the girls and the servants scuttling about 
after one, like mice in the wainscot; and it IS so absurd to be 
called upon!'

The apparition appears to have a thumb in the corner of its mouth 
while making this complaint.

'You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say.'

'Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can't just yet.  How are 
you?' (very shortly.)

'I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, 
Pussy, inasmuch as I see nothing of you.'

This second remonstrance brings a dark, bright, pouting eye out 
from a corner of the apron; but it swiftly becomes invisible again, 
as the apparition exclaims:  'O good gracious! you have had half 
your hair cut off!'

'I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think,' 
says Edwin, rumpling the hair in question, with a fierce glance at 
the looking-glass, and giving an impatient stamp.  'Shall I go?'

'No; you needn't go just yet, Eddy.  The girls would all be asking 
questions why you went.'

'Once for all, Rosa, will you uncover that ridiculous little head 
of yours and give me a welcome?'

The apron is pulled off the childish head, as its wearer replies:  
'You're very welcome, Eddy.  There! I'm sure that's nice.  Shake 
hands.  No, I can't kiss you, because I've got an acidulated drop 
in my mouth.'

'Are you at all glad to see me, Pussy?'

'O, yes, I'm dreadfully glad. - Go and sit down. - Miss 
Twinkleton.'

It is the custom of that excellent lady when these visits occur, to 
appear every three minutes, either in her own person or in that of 
Mrs. Tisher, and lay an offering on the shrine of Propriety by 
affecting to look for some desiderated article.  On the present 
occasion Miss Twinkleton, gracefully gliding in and out, says in 
passing:  'How do you do, Mr. Drood?  Very glad indeed to have the 
pleasure.  Pray excuse me.  Tweezers.  Thank you!'

'I got the gloves last evening, Eddy, and I like them very much.  
They are beauties.'

'Well, that's something,' the affianced replies, half grumbling.  
'The smallest encouragement thankfully received.  And how did you 
pass your birthday, Pussy?'

'Delightfully!  Everybody gave me a present.  And we had a feast.  
And we had a ball at night.'

'A feast and a ball, eh?  These occasions seem to go off tolerably 
well without me, Pussy.'

'De-lightfully!' cries Rosa, in a quite spontaneous manner, and 
without the least pretence of reserve.

'Hah!  And what was the feast?'

'Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps.'

'Any partners at the ball?'

'We danced with one another, of course, sir.  But some of the girls 
made game to be their brothers.  It WAS so droll!'

'Did anybody make game to be - '

'To be you?  O dear yes!' cries Rosa, laughing with great 
enjoyment.  'That was the first thing done.'

'I hope she did it pretty well,' says Edwin rather doubtfully.

'O, it was excellent! - I wouldn't dance with you, you know.'

Edwin scarcely seems to see the force of this; begs to know if he 
may take the liberty to ask why?

'Because I was so tired of you,' returns Rosa.  But she quickly 
adds, and pleadingly too, seeing displeasure in his face:  'Dear 
Eddy, you were just as tired of me, you know.'

'Did I say so, Rosa?'

'Say so!  Do you ever say so?  No, you only showed it.  O, she did 
it so well!' cries Rosa, in a sudden ecstasy with her counterfeit 
betrothed.

'It strikes me that she must be a devilish impudent girl,' says 
Edwin Drood.  'And so, Pussy, you have passed your last birthday in 
this old house.'

'Ah, yes!' Rosa clasps her hands, looks down with a sigh, and 
shakes her head.

'You seem to be sorry, Rosa.'

'I am sorry for the poor old place.  Somehow, I feel as if it would 
miss me, when I am gone so far away, so young.'

'Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?'

She looks up at him with a swift bright look; next moment shakes 
her head, sighs, and looks down again.

'That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?'

She nods her head again, and after a short silence, quaintly bursts 
out with:  'You know we must be married, and married from here, 
Eddy, or the poor girls will be so dreadfully disappointed!'

For the moment there is more of compassion, both for her and for 
himself, in her affianced husband's face, than there is of love.  
He checks the look, and asks:  'Shall I take you out for a walk, 
Rosa dear?'

Rosa dear does not seem at all clear on this point, until her face, 
which has been comically reflective, brightens.  'O, yes, Eddy; let 
us go for a walk!  And I tell you what we'll do.  You shall pretend 
that you are engaged to somebody else, and I'll pretend that I am 
not engaged to anybody, and then we shan't quarrel.'

'Do you think that will prevent our falling out, Rosa?'

'I know it will.  Hush!  Pretend to look out of window - Mrs. 
Tisher!'

Through a fortuitous concourse of accidents, the matronly Tisher 
heaves in sight, says, in rustling through the room like the 
legendary ghost of a dowager in silken skirts:  'I hope I see Mr. 
Drood well; though I needn't ask, if I may judge from his 
complexion.  I trust I disturb no one; but there WAS a paper-knife 
- O, thank you, I am sure!' and disappears with her prize.

'One other thing you must do, Eddy, to oblige me,' says Rosebud.  
'The moment we get into the street, you must put me outside, and 
keep close to the house yourself - squeeze and graze yourself 
against it.'

'By all means, Rosa, if you wish it.  Might I ask why?'

'O! because I don't want the girls to see you.'

'It's a fine day; but would you like me to carry an umbrella up?'

'Don't be foolish, sir.  You haven't got polished leather boots 
on,' pouting, with one shoulder raised.

'Perhaps that might escape the notice of the girls, even if they 
did see me,' remarks Edwin, looking down at his boots with a sudden 
distaste for them.

'Nothing escapes their notice, sir.  And then I know what would 
happen.  Some of them would begin reflecting on me by saying (for 
THEY are free) that they never will on any account engage 
themselves to lovers without polished leather boots.  Hark!  Miss 
Twinkleton.  I'll ask for leave.'

That discreet lady being indeed heard without, inquiring of nobody 
in a blandly conversational tone as she advances:  'Eh?  Indeed!  
Are you quite sure you saw my mother-of-pearl button-holder on the 
work-table in my room?' is at once solicited for walking leave, and 
graciously accords it.  And soon the young couple go out of the 
Nuns' House, taking all precautions against the discovery of the so 
vitally defective boots of Mr. Edwin Drood:  precautions, let us 
hope, effective for the peace of Mrs. Edwin Drood that is to be.

'Which way shall we take, Rosa?'

Rosa replies:  'I want to go to the Lumps-of-Delight shop.'

'To the - ?'

'A Turkish sweetmeat, sir.  My gracious me, don't you understand 
anything?  Call yourself an Engineer, and not know THAT?'

'Why, how should I know it, Rosa?'

'Because I am very fond of them.  But O! I forgot what we are to 
pretend.  No, you needn't know anything about them; never mind.'

So he is gloomily borne off to the Lumps-of-Delight shop, where 
Rosa makes her purchase, and, after offering some to him (which he 
rather indignantly declines), begins to partake of it with great 
zest:  previously taking off and rolling up a pair of little pink 
gloves, like rose-leaves, and occasionally putting her little pink 
fingers to her rosy lips, to cleanse them from the Dust of Delight 
that comes off the Lumps.

'Now, be a good-tempered Eddy, and pretend.  And so you are 
engaged?'

'And so I am engaged.'

'Is she nice?'

'Charming.'

'Tall?'

'Immensely tall!'  Rosa being short.

'Must be gawky, I should think,' is Rosa's quiet commentary.

'I beg your pardon; not at all,' contradiction rising in him.

'What is termed a fine woman; a splendid woman.'

'Big nose, no doubt,' is the quiet commentary again.

'Not a little one, certainly,' is the quick reply, (Rosa's being a 
little one.)

'Long pale nose, with a red knob in the middle.  I know the sort of 
nose,' says Rosa, with a satisfied nod, and tranquilly enjoying the 
Lumps.

'You DON'T know the sort of nose, Rosa,' with some warmth; 'because 
it's nothing of the kind.'

'Not a pale nose, Eddy?'

'No.'  Determined not to assent.

'A red nose?  O! I don't like red noses.  However; to be sure she 
can always powder it.'

'She would scorn to powder it,' says Edwin, becoming heated.

'Would she?  What a stupid thing she must be!  Is she stupid in 
everything?'

'No; in nothing.'

After a pause, in which the whimsically wicked face has not been 
unobservant of him, Rosa says:

'And this most sensible of creatures likes the idea of being 
carried off to Egypt; does she, Eddy?'

'Yes.  She takes a sensible interest in triumphs of engineering 
skill:  especially when they are to change the whole condition of 
an undeveloped country.'

'Lor!' says Rosa, shrugging her shoulders, with a little laugh of 
wonder.

'Do you object,' Edwin inquires, with a majestic turn of his eyes 
downward upon the fairy figure:  'do you object, Rosa, to her 
feeling that interest?'

'Object? my dear Eddy!  But really, doesn't she hate boilers and 
things?'

'I can answer for her not being so idiotic as to hate Boilers,' he 
returns with angry emphasis; 'though I cannot answer for her views 
about Things; really not understanding what Things are meant.'

'But don't she hate Arabs, and Turks, and Fellahs, and people?'

'Certainly not.'  Very firmly.

'At least she MUST hate the Pyramids?  Come, Eddy?'

'Why should she be such a little - tall, I mean - goose, as to hate 
the Pyramids, Rosa?'

'Ah! you should hear Miss Twinkleton,' often nodding her head, and 
much enjoying the Lumps, 'bore about them, and then you wouldn't 
ask.  Tiresome old burying-grounds!  Isises, and Ibises, and 
Cheopses, and Pharaohses; who cares about them?  And then there was 
Belzoni, or somebody, dragged out by the legs, half-choked with 
bats and dust.  All the girls say:  Serve him right, and hope it 
hurt him, and wish he had been quite choked.'

The two youthful figures, side by side, but not now arm-in-arm, 
wander discontentedly about the old Close; and each sometimes stops 
and slowly imprints a deeper footstep in the fallen leaves.

'Well!' says Edwin, after a lengthy silence.  'According to custom.  
We can't get on, Rosa.'

Rosa tosses her head, and says she don't want to get on.

'That's a pretty sentiment, Rosa, considering.'

'Considering what?'

'If I say what, you'll go wrong again.'

'YOU'LL go wrong, you mean, Eddy.  Don't be ungenerous.'

'Ungenerous!  I like that!'

'Then I DON'T like that, and so I tell you plainly,' Rosa pouts.

'Now, Rosa, I put it to you.  Who disparaged my profession, my 
destination - '

'You are not going to be buried in the Pyramids, I hope?' she 
interrupts, arching her delicate eyebrows.  'You never said you 
were.  If you are, why haven't you mentioned it to me?  I can't 
find out your plans by instinct.'

'Now, Rosa, you know very well what I mean, my dear.'

'Well then, why did you begin with your detestable red-nosed 
giantesses?  And she would, she would, she would, she would, she 
WOULD powder it!' cries Rosa, in a little burst of comical 
contradictory spleen.

'Somehow or other, I never can come right in these discussions,' 
says Edwin, sighing and becoming resigned.

'How is it possible, sir, that you ever can come right when you're 
always wrong?  And as to Belzoni, I suppose he's dead; - I'm sure I 
hope he is - and how can his legs or his chokes concern you?'

'It is nearly time for your return, Rosa.  We have not had a very 
happy walk, have we?'

'A happy walk?  A detestably unhappy walk, sir.  If I go up-stairs 
the moment I get in and cry till I can't take my dancing lesson, 
you are responsible, mind!'

'Let us be friends, Rosa.'

'Ah!' cries Rosa, shaking her head and bursting into real tears, 'I 
wish we COULD be friends!  It's because we can't be friends, that 
we try one another so.  I am a young little thing, Eddy, to have an 
old heartache; but I really, really have, sometimes.  Don't be 
angry.  I know you have one yourself too often.  We should both of 
us have done better, if What is to be had been left What might have 
been.  I am quite a little serious thing now, and not teasing you.  
Let each of us forbear, this one time, on our own account, and on 
the other's!'

Disarmed by this glimpse of a woman's nature in the spoilt child, 
though for an instant disposed to resent it as seeming to involve 
the enforced infliction of himself upon her, Edwin Drood stands 
watching her as she childishly cries and sobs, with both hands to 
the handkerchief at her eyes, and then - she becoming more 
composed, and indeed beginning in her young inconstancy to laugh at 
herself for having been so moved - leads her to a seat hard by, 
under the elm-trees.

'One clear word of understanding, Pussy dear.  I am not clever out 
of my own line - now I come to think of it, I don't know that I am 
particularly clever in it - but I want to do right.  There is not - 
there may be - I really don't see my way to what I want to say, but 
I must say it before we part - there is not any other young - '

'O no, Eddy!  It's generous of you to ask me; but no, no, no!'

They have come very near to the Cathedral windows, and at this 
moment the organ and the choir sound out sublimely.  As they sit 
listening to the solemn swell, the confidence of last night rises 
in young Edwin Drood's mind, and he thinks how unlike this music is 
to that discordance.

'I fancy I can distinguish Jack's voice,' is his remark in a low 
tone in connection with the train of thought.

'Take me back at once, please,' urges his Affianced, quickly laying 
her light hand upon his wrist.  'They will all be coming out 
directly; let us get away.  O, what a resounding chord!  But don't 
let us stop to listen to it; let us get away!'

Her hurry is over as soon as they have passed out of the Close.  
They go arm-in-arm now, gravely and deliberately enough, along the 
old High-street, to the Nuns' House.  At the gate, the street being 
within sight empty, Edwin bends down his face to Rosebud's.

She remonstrates, laughing, and is a childish schoolgirl again.

'Eddy, no!  I'm too sticky to be kissed.  But give me your hand, 
and I'll blow a kiss into that.'

He does so.  She breathes a light breath into it and asks, 
retaining it and looking into it:-

'Now say, what do you see?'

'See, Rosa?'

'Why, I thought you Egyptian boys could look into a hand and see 
all sorts of phantoms.  Can't you see a happy Future?'

For certain, neither of them sees a happy Present, as the gate 
opens and closes, and one goes in, and the other goes away.

CHAPTER IV - MR. SAPSEA

ACCEPTING the Jackass as the type of self-sufficient stupidity and 
conceit - a custom, perhaps, like some few other customs, more 
conventional than fair - then the purest jackass in Cloisterham is 
Mr. Thomas Sapsea, Auctioneer.

Mr. Sapsea 'dresses at' the Dean; has been bowed to for the Dean, 
in mistake; has even been spoken to in the street as My Lord, under 
the impression that he was the Bishop come down unexpectedly, 
without his chaplain.  Mr. Sapsea is very proud of this, and of his 
voice, and of his style.  He has even (in selling landed property) 
tried the experiment of slightly intoning in his pulpit, to make 
himself more like what he takes to be the genuine ecclesiastical 
article.  So, in ending a Sale by Public Auction, Mr. Sapsea 
finishes off with an air of bestowing a benediction on the 
assembled brokers, which leaves the real Dean - a modest and worthy 
gentleman - far behind.

Mr. Sapsea has many admirers; indeed, the proposition is carried by 
a large local majority, even including non-believers in his wisdom, 
that he is a credit to Cloisterham.  He possesses the great 
qualities of being portentous and dull, and of having a roll in his 
speech, and another roll in his gait; not to mention a certain 
gravely flowing action with his hands, as if he were presently 
going to Confirm the individual with whom he holds discourse.  Much 
nearer sixty years of age than fifty, with a flowing outline of 
stomach, and horizontal creases in his waistcoat; reputed to be 
rich; voting at elections in the strictly respectable interest; 
morally satisfied that nothing but he himself has grown since he 
was a baby; how can dunder-headed Mr. Sapsea be otherwise than a 
credit to Cloisterham, and society?

Mr. Sapsea's premises are in the High-street, over against the 
Nuns' House.  They are of about the period of the Nuns' House, 
irregularly modernised here and there, as steadily deteriorating 
generations found, more and more, that they preferred air and light 
to Fever and the Plague.  Over the doorway is a wooden effigy, 
about half life-size, representing Mr. Sapsea's father, in a curly 
wig and toga, in the act of selling.  The chastity of the idea, and 
the natural appearance of the little finger, hammer, and pulpit, 
have been much admired.

Mr. Sapsea sits in his dull ground-floor sitting-room, giving first 
on his paved back yard; and then on his railed-off garden.  Mr. 
Sapsea has a bottle of port wine on a table before the fire - the 
fire is an early luxury, but pleasant on the cool, chilly autumn 
evening - and is characteristically attended by his portrait, his 
eight-day clock, and his weather-glass.  Characteristically, 
because he would uphold himself against mankind, his weather-glass 
against weather, and his clock against time.

By Mr. Sapsea's side on the table are a writing-desk and writing 
materials.  Glancing at a scrap of manuscript, Mr. Sapsea reads it 
to himself with a lofty air, and then, slowly pacing the room with 
his thumbs in the arm-holes of his waistcoat, repeats it from 
memory:  so internally, though with much dignity, that the word 
'Ethelinda' is alone audible.

There are three clean wineglasses in a tray on the table.  His 
serving-maid entering, and announcing 'Mr. Jasper is come, sir,' 
Mr. Sapsea waves 'Admit him,' and draws two wineglasses from the 
rank, as being claimed.

'Glad to see you, sir.  I congratulate myself on having the honour 
of receiving you here for the first time.'  Mr. Sapsea does the 
honours of his house in this wise.

'You are very good.  The honour is mine and the self-congratulation 
is mine.'

'You are pleased to say so, sir.  But I do assure you that it is a 
satisfaction to me to receive you in my humble home.  And that is 
what I would not say to everybody.'  Ineffable loftiness on Mr. 
Sapsea's part accompanies these words, as leaving the sentence to 
be understood:  'You will not easily believe that your society can 
be a satisfaction to a man like myself; nevertheless, it is.'

'I have for some time desired to know you, Mr. Sapsea.'

'And I, sir, have long known you by reputation as a man of taste.  
Let me fill your glass.  I will give you, sir,' says Mr. Sapsea, 
filling his own:

'When the French come over,
May we meet them at Dover!'

This was a patriotic toast in Mr. Sapsea's infancy, and he is 
therefore fully convinced of its being appropriate to any 
subsequent era.

'You can scarcely be ignorant, Mr. Sapsea,' observes Jasper, 
watching the auctioneer with a smile as the latter stretches out 
his legs before the fire, 'that you know the world.'

'Well, sir,' is the chuckling reply, 'I think I know something of 
it; something of it.'

'Your reputation for that knowledge has always interested and 
surprised me, and made me wish to know you.  For Cloisterham is a 
little place.  Cooped up in it myself, I know nothing beyond it, 
and feel it to be a very little place.'

'If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man,' Mr. Sapsea 
begins, and then stops:- 'You will excuse me calling you young man, 
Mr. Jasper?  You are much my junior.'

'By all means.'

'If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man, foreign 
countries have come to me.  They have come to me in the way of 
business, and I have improved upon my opportunities.  Put it that I 
take an inventory, or make a catalogue.  I see a French clock.  I 
never saw him before, in my life, but I instantly lay my finger on 
him and say "Paris!"  I see some cups and saucers of Chinese make, 
equally strangers to me personally:  I put my finger on them, then 
and there, and I say "Pekin, Nankin, and Canton."  It is the same 
with Japan, with Egypt, and with bamboo and sandalwood from the 
East Indies; I put my finger on them all.  I have put my finger on 
the North Pole before now, and said "Spear of Esquimaux make, for 
half a pint of pale sherry!"'

'Really?  A very remarkable way, Mr. Sapsea, of acquiring a 
knowledge of men and things.'

'I mention it, sir,' Mr. Sapsea rejoins, with unspeakable 
complacency, 'because, as I say, it don't do to boast of what you 
are; but show how you came to be it, and then you prove it.'

'Most interesting.  We were to speak of the late Mrs. Sapsea.'

'We were, sir.'  Mr. Sapsea fills both glasses, and takes the 
decanter into safe keeping again.  'Before I consult your opinion 
as a man of taste on this little trifle' - holding it up - 'which 
is BUT a trifle, and still has required some thought, sir, some 
little fever of the brow, I ought perhaps to describe the character 
of the late Mrs. Sapsea, now dead three quarters of a year.'

Mr. Jasper, in the act of yawning behind his wineglass, puts down 
that screen and calls up a look of interest.  It is a little 
impaired in its expressiveness by his having a shut-up gape still 
to dispose of, with watering eyes.

'Half a dozen years ago, or so,' Mr. Sapsea proceeds, 'when I had 
enlarged my mind up to - I will not say to what it now is, for that 
might seem to aim at too much, but up to the pitch of wanting 
another mind to be absorbed in it - I cast my eye about me for a 
nuptial partner.  Because, as I say, it is not good for man to be 
alone.'

Mr. Jasper appears to commit this original idea to memory.

'Miss Brobity at that time kept, I will not call it the rival 
establishment to the establishment at the Nuns' House opposite, but 
I will call it the other parallel establishment down town.  The 
world did have it that she showed a passion for attending my sales, 
when they took place on half holidays, or in vacation time.  The 
world did put it about, that she admired my style.  The world did 
notice that as time flowed by, my style became traceable in the 
dictation-exercises of Miss Brobity's pupils.  Young man, a whisper 
even sprang up in obscure malignity, that one ignorant and besotted 
Churl (a parent) so committed himself as to object to it by name.  
But I do not believe this.  For is it likely that any human 
creature in his right senses would so lay himself open to be 
pointed at, by what I call the finger of scorn?'

Mr. Jasper shakes his head.  Not in the least likely.  Mr. Sapsea, 
in a grandiloquent state of absence of mind, seems to refill his 
visitor's glass, which is full already; and does really refill his 
own, which is empty.

'Miss Brobity's Being, young man, was deeply imbued with homage to 
Mind.  She revered Mind, when launched, or, as I say, precipitated, 
on an extensive knowledge of the world.  When I made my proposal, 
she did me the honour to be so overshadowed with a species of Awe, 
as to be able to articulate only the two words, "O Thou!" meaning 
myself.  Her limpid blue eyes were fixed upon me, her semi-
transparent hands were clasped together, pallor overspread her 
aquiline features, and, though encouraged to proceed, she never did 
proceed a word further.  I disposed of the parallel establishment 
by private contract, and we became as nearly one as could be 
expected under the circumstances.  But she never could, and she 
never did, find a phrase satisfactory to her perhaps-too-favourable 
estimate of my intellect.  To the very last (feeble action of 
liver), she addressed me in the same unfinished terms.'

Mr. Jasper has closed his eyes as the auctioneer has deepened his 
voice.  He now abruptly opens them, and says, in unison with the 
deepened voice 'Ah!' - rather as if stopping himself on the extreme 
verge of adding - 'men!'

'I have been since,' says Mr. Sapsea, with his legs stretched out, 
and solemnly enjoying himself with the wine and the fire, 'what you 
behold me; I have been since a solitary mourner; I have been since, 
as I say, wasting my evening conversation on the desert air.  I 
will not say that I have reproached myself; but there have been 
times when I have asked myself the question:  What if her husband 
had been nearer on a level with her?  If she had not had to look up 
quite so high, what might the stimulating action have been upon the 
liver?'

Mr. Jasper says, with an appearance of having fallen into 
dreadfully low spirits, that he 'supposes it was to be.'

'We can only suppose so, sir,' Mr. Sapsea coincides.  'As I say, 
Man proposes, Heaven disposes.  It may or may not be putting the 
same thought in another form; but that is the way I put it.'

Mr. Jasper murmurs assent.

'And now, Mr. Jasper,' resumes the auctioneer, producing his scrap 
of manuscript, 'Mrs. Sapsea's monument having had full time to 
settle and dry, let me take your opinion, as a man of taste, on the 
inscription I have (as I before remarked, not without some little 
fever of the brow) drawn out for it.  Take it in your own hand.  
The setting out of the lines requires to be followed with the eye, 
as well as the contents with the mind.'

Mr. Jasper complying, sees and reads as follows:

ETHELINDA,
Reverential Wife of
MR. THOMAS SAPSEA,
AUCTIONEER, VALUER, ESTATE AGENT, &c.,
OF THIS CITY.
Whose Knowledge of the World,
Though somewhat extensive,
Never brought him acquainted with
A SPIRIT
More capable of
LOOKING UP TO HIM.
STRANGER, PAUSE
And ask thyself the Question,
CANST THOU DO LIKEWISE?
If Not,
WITH A BLUSH RETIRE.

Mr. Sapsea having risen and stationed himself with his back to the 
fire, for the purpose of observing the effect of these lines on the 
countenance of a man of taste, consequently has his face towards 
the door, when his serving-maid, again appearing, announces, 
'Durdles is come, sir!'  He promptly draws forth and fills the 
third wineglass, as being now claimed, and replies, 'Show Durdles 
in.'

'Admirable!' quoth Mr. Jasper, handing back the paper.

'You approve, sir?'

'Impossible not to approve.  Striking, characteristic, and 
complete.'

The auctioneer inclines his head, as one accepting his due and 
giving a receipt; and invites the entering Durdles to take off that 
glass of wine (handing the same), for it will warm him.

Durdles is a stonemason; chiefly in the gravestone, tomb, and 
monument way, and wholly of their colour from head to foot.  No man 
is better known in Cloisterham.  He is the chartered libertine of 
the place.  Fame trumpets him a wonderful workman - which, for 
aught that anybody knows, he may be (as he never works); and a 
wonderful sot - which everybody knows he is.  With the Cathedral 
crypt he is better acquainted than any living authority; it may 
even be than any dead one.  It is said that the intimacy of this 
acquaintance began in his habitually resorting to that secret 
place, to lock-out the Cloisterham boy-populace, and sleep off 
fumes of liquor:  he having ready access to the Cathedral, as 
contractor for rough repairs.  Be this as it may, he does know much 
about it, and, in the demolition of impedimental fragments of wall, 
buttress, and pavement, has seen strange sights.  He often speaks 
of himself in the third person; perhaps, being a little misty as to 
his own identity, when he narrates; perhaps impartially adopting 
the Cloisterham nomenclature in reference to a character of 
acknowledged distinction.  Thus he will say, touching his strange 
sights:  'Durdles come upon the old chap,' in reference to a buried 
magnate of ancient time and high degree, 'by striking right into 
the coffin with his pick.  The old chap gave Durdles a look with 
his open eyes, as much as to say, "Is your name Durdles?  Why, my 
man, I've been waiting for you a devil of a time!"  And then he 
turned to powder.'  With a two-foot rule always in his pocket, and 
a mason's hammer all but always in his hand, Durdles goes 
continually sounding and tapping all about and about the Cathedral; 
and whenever he says to Tope:  'Tope, here's another old 'un in 
here!'  Tope announces it to the Dean as an established discovery.

In a suit of coarse flannel with horn buttons, a yellow neckerchief 
with draggled ends, an old hat more russet-coloured than black, and 
laced boots of the hue of his stony calling, Durdles leads a hazy, 
gipsy sort of life, carrying his dinner about with him in a small 
bundle, and sitting on all manner of tombstones to dine.  This 
dinner of Durdles's has become quite a Cloisterham institution:  
not only because of his never appearing in public without it, but 
because of its having been, on certain renowned occasions, taken 
into custody along with Durdles (as drunk and incapable), and 
exhibited before the Bench of justices at the townhall.  These 
occasions, however, have been few and far apart:  Durdles being as 
seldom drunk as sober.  For the rest, he is an old bachelor, and he 
lives in a little antiquated hole of a house that was never 
finished:  supposed to be built, so far, of stones stolen from the 
city wall.  To this abode there is an approach, ankle-deep in stone 
chips, resembling a petrified grove of tombstones, urns, draperies, 
and broken columns, in all stages of sculpture.  Herein two 
journeymen incessantly chip, while other two journeymen, who face 
each other, incessantly saw stone; dipping as regularly in and out 
of their sheltering sentry-boxes, as if they were mechanical 
figures emblematical of Time and Death.

To Durdles, when he had consumed his glass of port, Mr. Sapsea 
intrusts that precious effort of his Muse.  Durdles unfeelingly 
takes out his two-foot rule, and measures the lines calmly, 
alloying them with stone-grit.

'This is for the monument, is it, Mr. Sapsea?'

'The Inscription.  Yes.'  Mr. Sapsea waits for its effect on a 
common mind.

'It'll come in to a eighth of a inch,' says Durdles.  'Your 
servant, Mr. Jasper.  Hope I see you well.'

'How are you Durdles?'

'I've got a touch of the Tombatism on me, Mr. Jasper, but that I 
must expect.'

'You mean the Rheumatism,' says Sapsea, in a sharp tone.  (He is 
nettled by having his composition so mechanically received.)

'No, I don't.  I mean, Mr. Sapsea, the Tombatism.  It's another 
sort from Rheumatism.  Mr. Jasper knows what Durdles means.  You 
get among them Tombs afore it's well light on a winter morning, and 
keep on, as the Catechism says, a-walking in the same all the days 
of your life, and YOU'LL know what Durdles means.'

'It is a bitter cold place,' Mr. Jasper assents, with an 
antipathetic shiver.

'And if it's bitter cold for you, up in the chancel, with a lot of 
live breath smoking out about you, what the bitterness is to 
Durdles, down in the crypt among the earthy damps there, and the 
dead breath of the old 'uns,' returns that individual, 'Durdles 
leaves you to judge. - Is this to be put in hand at once, Mr. 
Sapsea?'

Mr. Sapsea, with an Author's anxiety to rush into publication, 
replies that it cannot be out of hand too soon.

'You had better let me have the key then,' says Durdles.

'Why, man, it is not to be put inside the monument!'

'Durdles knows where it's to be put, Mr. Sapsea; no man better.  
Ask 'ere a man in Cloisterham whether Durdles knows his work.'

Mr. Sapsea rises, takes a key from a drawer, unlocks an iron safe 
let into the wall, and takes from it another key.

'When Durdles puts a touch or a finish upon his work, no matter 
where, inside or outside, Durdles likes to look at his work all 
round, and see that his work is a-doing him credit,' Durdles 
explains, doggedly.

The key proffered him by the bereaved widower being a large one, he 
slips his two-foot rule into a side-pocket of his flannel trousers 
made for it, and deliberately opens his flannel coat, and opens the 
mouth of a large breast-pocket within it before taking the key to 
place it in that repository.

'Why, Durdles!' exclaims Jasper, looking on amused, 'you are 
undermined with pockets!'

'And I carries weight in 'em too, Mr. Jasper.  Feel those!' 
producing two other large keys.

'Hand me Mr. Sapsea's likewise.  Surely this is the heaviest of the 
three.'

'You'll find 'em much of a muchness, I expect,' says Durdles.  
'They all belong to monuments.  They all open Durdles's work.  
Durdles keeps the keys of his work mostly.  Not that they're much 
used.'

'By the bye,' it comes into Jasper's mind to say, as he idly 
examines the keys, 'I have been going to ask you, many a day, and 
have always forgotten.  You know they sometimes call you Stony 
Durdles, don't you?'

'Cloisterham knows me as Durdles, Mr. Jasper.'

'I am aware of that, of course.  But the boys sometimes - '

'O! if you mind them young imps of boys - ' Durdles gruffly 
interrupts.

'I don't mind them any more than you do.  But there was a 
discussion the other day among the Choir, whether Stony stood for 
Tony;' clinking one key against another.

('Take care of the wards, Mr. Jasper.')

'Or whether Stony stood for Stephen;' clinking with a change of 
keys.

('You can't make a pitch pipe of 'em, Mr. Jasper.')

'Or whether the name comes from your trade.  How stands the fact?'

Mr. Jasper weighs the three keys in his hand, lifts his head from 
his idly stooping attitude over the fire, and delivers the keys to 
Durdles with an ingenuous and friendly face.

But the stony one is a gruff one likewise, and that hazy state of 
his is always an uncertain state, highly conscious of its dignity, 
and prone to take offence.  He drops his two keys back into his 
pocket one by one, and buttons them up; he takes his dinner-bundle 
from the chair-back on which he hung it when he came in; he 
distributes the weight he carries, by tying the third key up in it, 
as though he were an Ostrich, and liked to dine off cold iron; and 
he gets out of the room, deigning no word of answer.

Mr. Sapsea then proposes a hit at backgammon, which, seasoned with 
his own improving conversation, and terminating in a supper of cold 
roast beef and salad, beguiles the golden evening until pretty 
late.  Mr. Sapsea's wisdom being, in its delivery to mortals, 
rather of the diffuse than the epigrammatic order, is by no means 
expended even then; but his visitor intimates that he will come 
back for more of the precious commodity on future occasions, and 
Mr. Sapsea lets him off for the present, to ponder on the 
instalment he carries away.

CHAPTER V - MR. DURDLES AND FRIEND

JOHN JASPER, on his way home through the Close, is brought to a 
stand-still by the spectacle of Stony Durdles, dinner-bundle and 
all, leaning his back against the iron railing of the burial-ground 
enclosing it from the old cloister-arches; and a hideous small boy 
in rags flinging stones at him as a well-defined mark in the 
moonlight.  Sometimes the stones hit him, and sometimes they miss 
him, but Durdles seems indifferent to either fortune.  The hideous 
small boy, on the contrary, whenever he hits Durdles, blows a 
whistle of triumph through a jagged gap, convenient for the 
purpose, in the front of his mouth, where half his teeth are 
wanting; and whenever he misses him, yelps out 'Mulled agin!' and 
tries to atone for the failure by taking a more correct and vicious 
aim.

'What are you doing to the man?' demands Jasper, stepping out into 
the moonlight from the shade.

'Making a cock-shy of him,' replies the hideous small boy.

'Give me those stones in your hand.'

'Yes, I'll give 'em you down your throat, if you come a-ketching 
hold of me,' says the small boy, shaking himself loose, and 
backing.  'I'll smash your eye, if you don't look out!'

'Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?'

'He won't go home.'

'What is that to you?'

'He gives me a 'apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too 
late,' says the boy.  And then chants, like a little savage, half 
stumbling and half dancing among the rags and laces of his 
dilapidated boots:-

'Widdy widdy wen!
I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - ten,
Widdy widdy wy!
Then - E - don't - go - then - I - shy -
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!'

- with a comprehensive sweep on the last word, and one more 
delivery at Durdles.

This would seem to be a poetical note of preparation, agreed upon, 
as a caution to Durdles to stand clear if he can, or to betake 
himself homeward.

John Jasper invites the boy with a beck of his head to follow him 
(feeling it hopeless to drag him, or coax him), and crosses to the 
iron railing where the Stony (and stoned) One is profoundly 
meditating.

'Do you know this thing, this child?' asks Jasper, at a loss for a 
word that will define this thing.

'Deputy,' says Durdles, with a nod.

'Is that its - his - name?'

'Deputy,' assents Durdles.

'I'm man-servant up at the Travellers' Twopenny in Gas Works 
Garding,' this thing explains.  'All us man-servants at Travellers' 
Lodgings is named Deputy.  When we're chock full and the Travellers 
is all a-bed I come out for my 'elth.'  Then withdrawing into the 
road, and taking aim, he resumes:-

'Widdy widdy wen!
I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - '

'Hold your hand,' cries Jasper, 'and don't throw while I stand so 
near him, or I'll kill you!  Come, Durdles; let me walk home with 
you to-night.  Shall I carry your bundle?'

'Not on any account,' replies Durdles, adjusting it.  'Durdles was 
making his reflections here when you come up, sir, surrounded by 
his works, like a poplar Author. - Your own brother-in-law;' 
introducing a sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the 
moonlight.  'Mrs. Sapsea;' introducing the monument of that devoted 
wife.  'Late Incumbent;' introducing the Reverend Gentleman's 
broken column.  'Departed Assessed Taxes;' introducing a vase and 
towel, standing on what might represent the cake of soap.  'Former 
pastrycook and Muffin-maker, much respected;' introducing 
gravestone.  'All safe and sound here, sir, and all Durdles's work.  
Of the common folk, that is merely bundled up in turf and brambles, 
the less said the better.  A poor lot, soon forgot.'

'This creature, Deputy, is behind us,' says Jasper, looking back.  
'Is he to follow us?'

The relations between Durdles and Deputy are of a capricious kind; 
for, on Durdles's turning himself about with the slow gravity of 
beery suddenness, Deputy makes a pretty wide circuit into the road 
and stands on the defensive.

'You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night,' says 
Durdles, unexpectedly reminded of, or imagining, an injury.

'Yer lie, I did,' says Deputy, in his only form of polite 
contradiction.

'Own brother, sir,' observes Durdles, turning himself about again, 
and as unexpectedly forgetting his offence as he had recalled or 
conceived it; 'own brother to Peter the Wild Boy!  But I gave him 
an object in life.'

'At which he takes aim?' Mr. Jasper suggests.

'That's it, sir,' returns Durdles, quite satisfied; 'at which he 
takes aim.  I took him in hand and gave him an object.  What was he 
before?  A destroyer.  What work did he do?  Nothing but 
destruction.  What did he earn by it?  Short terms in Cloisterham 
jail.  Not a person, not a piece of property, not a winder, not a 
horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but 
what he stoned, for want of an enlightened object.  I put that 
enlightened object before him, and now he can turn his honest 
halfpenny by the three penn'orth a week.'

'I wonder he has no competitors.'

'He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones 'em all away.  Now, I 
don't know what this scheme of mine comes to,' pursues Durdles, 
considering about it with the same sodden gravity; 'I don't know 
what you may precisely call it.  It ain't a sort of a - scheme of a 
- National Education?'

'I should say not,' replies Jasper.

'I should say not,' assents Durdles; 'then we won't try to give it 
a name.'

'He still keeps behind us,' repeats Jasper, looking over his 
shoulder; 'is he to follow us?'

'We can't help going round by the Travellers' Twopenny, if we go 
the short way, which is the back way,' Durdles answers, 'and we'll 
drop him there.'

So they go on; Deputy, as a rear rank one, taking open order, and 
invading the silence of the hour and place by stoning every wall, 
post, pillar, and other inanimate object, by the deserted way.

'Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?' asks John 
Jasper.

'Anything old, I think you mean,' growls Durdles.  'It ain't a spot 
for novelty.'

'Any new discovery on your part, I meant.'

'There's a old 'un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go 
down the broken steps of the little underground chapel as formerly 
was; I make him out (so fur as I've made him out yet) to be one of 
them old 'uns with a crook.  To judge from the size of the passages 
in the walls, and of the steps and doors, by which they come and 
went, them crooks must have been a good deal in the way of the old 
'uns!  Two on 'em meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another 
by the mitre pretty often, I should say.'

Without any endeavour to correct the literality of this opinion, 
Jasper surveys his companion - covered from head to foot with old 
mortar, lime, and stone grit - as though he, Jasper, were getting 
imbued with a romantic interest in his weird life.

'Yours is a curious existence.'

Without furnishing the least clue to the question, whether he 
receives this as a compliment or as quite the reverse, Durdles 
gruffly answers:  'Yours is another.'

'Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly, 
never-changing place, Yes.  But there is much more mystery and 
interest in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine.  
Indeed, I am beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me 
on as a sort of student, or free 'prentice, under you, and to let 
me go about with you sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks in 
which you pass your days.'

The Stony One replies, in a general way, 'All right.  Everybody 
knows where to find Durdles, when he's wanted.'  Which, if not 
strictly true, is approximately so, if taken to express that 
Durdles may always be found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.

'What I dwell upon most,' says Jasper, pursuing his subject of 
romantic interest, 'is the remarkable accuracy with which you would 
seem to find out where people are buried. - What is the matter?  
That bundle is in your way; let me hold it.'

Durdles has stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all 
his movements, immediately skirmishing into the road), and was 
looking about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on, when 
thus relieved of it.

'Just you give me my hammer out of that,' says Durdles, 'and I'll 
show you.'

Clink, clink.  And his hammer is handed him.

'Now, lookee here.  You pitch your note, don't you, Mr. Jasper?'

'Yes.'

'So I sound for mine.  I take my hammer, and I tap.'  (Here he 
strikes the pavement, and the attentive Deputy skirmishes at a 
rather wider range, as supposing that his head may be in 
requisition.)  'I tap, tap, tap.  Solid!  I go on tapping.  Solid 
still!  Tap again.  Holloa!  Hollow!  Tap again, persevering.  
Solid in hollow!  Tap, tap, tap, to try it better.  Solid in 
hollow; and inside solid, hollow again!  There you are!  Old 'un 
crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault!'

'Astonishing!'

'I have even done this,' says Durdles, drawing out his two-foot 
rule (Deputy meanwhile skirmishing nearer, as suspecting that 
Treasure may be about to be discovered, which may somehow lead to 
his own enrichment, and the delicious treat of the discoverers 
being hanged by the neck, on his evidence, until they are dead).  
'Say that hammer of mine's a wall - my work.  Two; four; and two is 
six,' measuring on the pavement.  'Six foot inside that wall is 
Mrs. Sapsea.'

'Not really Mrs. Sapsea?'

'Say Mrs. Sapsea.  Her wall's thicker, but say Mrs. Sapsea.  
Durdles taps, that wall represented by that hammer, and says, after 
good sounding:  "Something betwixt us!"  Sure enough, some rubbish 
has been left in that same six-foot space by Durdles's men!'

Jasper opines that such accuracy 'is a gift.'

'I wouldn't have it at a gift,' returns Durdles, by no means 
receiving the observation in good part.  'I worked it out for 
myself.  Durdles comes by HIS knowledge through grubbing deep for 
it, and having it up by the roots when it don't want to come. - 
Holloa you Deputy!'

'Widdy!' is Deputy's shrill response, standing off again.

'Catch that ha'penny.  And don't let me see any more of you to-
night, after we come to the Travellers' Twopenny.'

'Warning!' returns Deputy, having caught the halfpenny, and 
appearing by this mystic word to express his assent to the 
arrangement.

They have but to cross what was once the vineyard, belonging to 
what was once the Monastery, to come into the narrow back lane 
wherein stands the crazy wooden house of two low stories currently 
known as the Travellers' Twopenny:- a house all warped and 
distorted, like the morals of the travellers, with scant remains of 
a lattice-work porch over the door, and also of a rustic fence 
before its stamped-out garden; by reason of the travellers being so 
bound to the premises by a tender sentiment (or so fond of having a 
fire by the roadside in the course of the day), that they can never 
be persuaded or threatened into departure, without violently 
possessing themselves of some wooden forget-me-not, and bearing it 
off.

The semblance of an inn is attempted to be given to this wretched 
place by fragments of conventional red curtaining in the windows, 
which rags are made muddily transparent in the night-season by 
feeble lights of rush or cotton dip burning dully in the close air 
of the inside.  As Durdles and Jasper come near, they are addressed 
by an inscribed paper lantern over the door, setting forth the 
purport of the house.  They are also addressed by some half-dozen 
other hideous small boys - whether twopenny lodgers or followers or 
hangers-on of such, who knows! - who, as if attracted by some 
carrion-scent of Deputy in the air, start into the moonlight, as 
vultures might gather in the desert, and instantly fall to stoning 
him and one another.

'Stop, you young brutes,' cries Jasper angrily, 'and let us go by!'

This remonstrance being received with yells and flying stones, 
according to a custom of late years comfortably established among 
the police regulations of our English communities, where Christians 
are stoned on all sides, as if the days of Saint Stephen were 
revived, Durdles remarks of the young savages, with some point, 
that 'they haven't got an object,' and leads the way down the lane.

At the corner of the lane, Jasper, hotly enraged, checks his 
companion and looks back.  All is silent.  Next moment, a stone 
coming rattling at his hat, and a distant yell of 'Wake-Cock!  
Warning!' followed by a crow, as from some infernally-hatched 
Chanticleer, apprising him under whose victorious fire he stands, 
he turns the corner into safety, and takes Durdles home:  Durdles 
stumbling among the litter of his stony yard as if he were going to 
turn head foremost into one of the unfinished tombs.

John Jasper returns by another way to his gatehouse, and entering 
softly with his key, finds his fire still burning.  He takes from a 
locked press a peculiar-looking pipe, which he fills - but not with 
tobacco - and, having adjusted the contents of the bowl, very 
carefully, with a little instrument, ascends an inner staircase of 
only a few steps, leading to two rooms.  One of these is his own 
sleeping chamber:  the other is his nephew's.  There is a light in 
each.

His nephew lies asleep, calm and untroubled.  John Jasper stands 
looking down upon him, his unlighted pipe in his hand, for some 
time, with a fixed and deep attention.  Then, hushing his 
footsteps, he passes to his own room, lights his pipe, and delivers 
himself to the Spectres it invokes at midnight.

CHAPTER VI - PHILANTHROPY IN MINOR CANON CORNER

THE Reverend Septimus Crisparkle (Septimus, because six little 
brother Crisparkles before him went out, one by one, as they were 
born, like six weak little rushlights, as they were lighted), 
having broken the thin morning ice near Cloisterham Weir with his 
amiable head, much to the invigoration of his frame, was now 
assisting his circulation by boxing at a looking-glass with great 
science and prowess.  A fresh and healthy portrait the looking-
glass presented of the Reverend Septimus, feinting and dodging with 
the utmost artfulness, and hitting out from the shoulder with the 
utmost straightness, while his radiant features teemed with 
innocence, and soft-hearted benevolence beamed from his boxing-
gloves.

It was scarcely breakfast-time yet, for Mrs. Crisparkle - mother, 
not wife of the Reverend Septimus - was only just down, and waiting 
for the urn.  Indeed, the Reverend Septimus left off at this very 
moment to take the pretty old lady's entering face between his 
boxing-gloves and kiss it.  Having done so with tenderness, the 
Reverend Septimus turned to again, countering with his left, and 
putting in his right, in a tremendous manner.

'I say, every morning of my life, that you'll do it at last, Sept,' 
remarked the old lady, looking on; 'and so you will.'

'Do what, Ma dear?'

'Break the pier-glass, or burst a blood-vessel.'

'Neither, please God, Ma dear.  Here's wind, Ma.  Look at this!'  
In a concluding round of great severity, the Reverend Septimus 
administered and escaped all sorts of punishment, and wound up by 
getting the old lady's cap into Chancery - such is the technical 
term used in scientific circles by the learned in the Noble Art - 
with a lightness of touch that hardly stirred the lightest lavender 
or cherry riband on it.  Magnanimously releasing the defeated, just 
in time to get his gloves into a drawer and feign to be looking out 
of window in a contemplative state of mind when a servant entered, 
the Reverend Septimus then gave place to the urn and other 
preparations for breakfast.  These completed, and the two alone 
again, it was pleasant to see (or would have been, if there had 
been any one to see it, which there never was), the old lady 
standing to say the Lord's Prayer aloud, and her son, Minor Canon 
nevertheless, standing with bent head to hear it, he being within 
five years of forty:  much as he had stood to hear the same words 
from the same lips when he was within five months of four.

What is prettier than an old lady - except a young lady - when her 
eyes are bright, when her figure is trim and compact, when her face 
is cheerful and calm, when her dress is as the dress of a china 
shepherdess:  so dainty in its colours, so individually assorted to 
herself, so neatly moulded on her?  Nothing is prettier, thought 
the good Minor Canon frequently, when taking his seat at table 
opposite his long-widowed mother.  Her thought at such times may be 
condensed into the two words that oftenest did duty together in all 
her conversations:  'My Sept!'

They were a good pair to sit breakfasting together in Minor Canon 
Corner, Cloisterham.  For Minor Canon Corner was a quiet place in 
the shadow of the Cathedral, which the cawing of the rooks, the 
echoing footsteps of rare passers, the sound of the Cathedral bell, 
or the roll of the Cathedral organ, seemed to render more quiet 
than absolute silence.  Swaggering fighting men had had their 
centuries of ramping and raving about Minor Canon Corner, and 
beaten serfs had had their centuries of drudging and dying there, 
and powerful monks had had their centuries of being sometimes 
useful and sometimes harmful there, and behold they were all gone 
out of Minor Canon Corner, and so much the better.  Perhaps one of 
the highest uses of their ever having been there, was, that there 
might be left behind, that blessed air of tranquillity which 
pervaded Minor Canon Corner, and that serenely romantic state of 
the mind - productive for the most part of pity and forbearance - 
which is engendered by a sorrowful story that is all told, or a 
pathetic play that is played out.

Red-brick walls harmoniously toned down in colour by time, strong-
rooted ivy, latticed windows, panelled rooms, big oaken beams in 
little places, and stone-walled gardens where annual fruit yet 
ripened upon monkish trees, were the principal surroundings of 
pretty old Mrs. Crisparkle and the Reverend Septimus as they sat at 
breakfast.

'And what, Ma dear,' inquired the Minor Canon, giving proof of a 
wholesome and vigorous appetite, 'does the letter say?'

The pretty old lady, after reading it, had just laid it down upon 
the breakfast-cloth.  She handed it over to her son.

Now, the old lady was exceedingly proud of her bright eyes being so 
clear that she could read writing without spectacles.  Her son was 
also so proud of the circumstance, and so dutifully bent on her 
deriving the utmost possible gratification from it, that he had 
invented the pretence that he himself could NOT read writing 
without spectacles.  Therefore he now assumed a pair, of grave and 
prodigious proportions, which not only seriously inconvenienced his 
nose and his breakfast, but seriously impeded his perusal of the 
letter.  For, he had the eyes of a microscope and a telescope 
combined, when they were unassisted.

'It's from Mr. Honeythunder, of course,' said the old lady, folding 
her arms.

'Of course,' assented her son.  He then lamely read on:

'"Haven of Philanthropy,
Chief Offices, London, Wednesday.

'"DEAR MADAM,

'"I write in the - ;"  In the what's this?  What does he write in?'

'In the chair,' said the old lady.

The Reverend Septimus took off his spectacles, that he might see 
her face, as he exclaimed:

'Why, what should he write in?'

'Bless me, bless me, Sept,' returned the old lady, 'you don't see 
the context!  Give it back to me, my dear.'

Glad to get his spectacles off (for they always made his eyes 
water), her son obeyed:  murmuring that his sight for reading 
manuscript got worse and worse daily.

'"I write,"' his mother went on, reading very perspicuously and 
precisely, '"from the chair, to which I shall probably be confined 
for some hours."'

Septimus looked at the row of chairs against the wall, with a half-
protesting and half-appealing countenance.

'"We have,"' the old lady read on with a little extra emphasis, '"a 
meeting of our Convened Chief Composite Committee of Central and 
District Philanthropists, at our Head Haven as above; and it is 
their unanimous pleasure that I take the chair."'

Septimus breathed more freely, and muttered:  'O! if he comes to 
THAT, let him,'

'"Not to lose a day's post, I take the opportunity of a long report 
being read, denouncing a public miscreant - "'

'It is a most extraordinary thing,' interposed the gentle Minor 
Canon, laying down his knife and fork to rub his ear in a vexed 
manner, 'that these Philanthropists are always denouncing somebody.  
And it is another most extraordinary thing that they are always so 
violently flush of miscreants!'

'"Denouncing a public miscreant - "' - the old lady resumed, '"to 
get our little affair of business off my mind.  I have spoken with 
my two wards, Neville and Helena Landless, on the subject of their 
defective education, and they give in to the plan proposed; as I 
should have taken good care they did, whether they liked it or 
not."'

'And it is another most extraordinary thing,' remarked the Minor 
Canon in the same tone as before, 'that these philanthropists are 
so given to seizing their fellow-creatures by the scruff of the 
neck, and (as one may say) bumping them into the paths of peace. - 
I beg your pardon, Ma dear, for interrupting.'

'"Therefore, dear Madam, you will please prepare your son, the Rev. 
Mr. Septimus, to expect Neville as an inmate to be read with, on 
Monday next.  On the same day Helena will accompany him to 
Cloisterham, to take up her quarters at the Nuns' House, the 
establishment recommended by yourself and son jointly.  Please 
likewise to prepare for her reception and tuition there.  The terms 
in both cases are understood to be exactly as stated to me in 
writing by yourself, when I opened a correspondence with you on 
this subject, after the honour of being introduced to you at your 
sister's house in town here.  With compliments to the Rev.  Mr. 
Septimus, I am, Dear Madam, Your affectionate brother (In 
Philanthropy), LUKE HONEYTHUNDER."'

'Well, Ma,' said Septimus, after a little more rubbing of his ear, 
'we must try it.  There can be no doubt that we have room for an 
inmate, and that I have time to bestow upon him, and inclination 
too.  I must confess to feeling rather glad that he is not Mr. 
Honeythunder himself.  Though that seems wretchedly prejudiced - 
does it not? - for I never saw him.  Is he a large man, Ma?'

'I should call him a large man, my dear,' the old lady replied 
after some hesitation, 'but that his voice is so much larger.'

'Than himself?'

'Than anybody.'

'Hah!' said Septimus.  And finished his breakfast as if the flavour 
of the Superior Family Souchong, and also of the ham and toast and 
eggs, were a little on the wane.

Mrs. Crisparkle's sister, another piece of Dresden china, and 
matching her so neatly that they would have made a delightful pair 
of ornaments for the two ends of any capacious old-fashioned 
chimneypiece, and by right should never have been seen apart, was 
the childless wife of a clergyman holding Corporation preferment in 
London City.  Mr. Honeythunder in his public character of Professor 
of Philanthropy had come to know Mrs. Crisparkle during the last 
re-matching of the china ornaments (in other words during her last 
annual visit to her sister), after a public occasion of a 
philanthropic nature, when certain devoted orphans of tender years 
had been glutted with plum buns, and plump bumptiousness.  These 
were all the antecedents known in Minor Canon Corner of the coming 
pupils.

'I am sure you will agree with me, Ma,' said Mr. Crisparkle, after 
thinking the matter over, 'that the first thing to be done, is, to 
put these young people as much at their ease as possible.  There is 
nothing disinterested in the notion, because we cannot be at our 
ease with them unless they are at their ease with us.  Now, 
Jasper's nephew is down here at present; and like takes to like, 
and youth takes to youth.  He is a cordial young fellow, and we 
will have him to meet the brother and sister at dinner.  That's 
three.  We can't think of asking him, without asking Jasper.  
That's four.  Add Miss Twinkleton and the fairy bride that is to 
be, and that's six.  Add our two selves, and that's eight.  Would 
eight at a friendly dinner at all put you out, Ma?'

'Nine would, Sept,' returned the old lady, visibly nervous.

'My dear Ma, I particularise eight.'

'The exact size of the table and the room, my dear.'

So it was settled that way:  and when Mr. Crisparkle called with 
his mother upon Miss Twinkleton, to arrange for the reception of 
Miss Helena Landless at the Nuns' House, the two other invitations 
having reference to that establishment were proffered and accepted.  
Miss Twinkleton did, indeed, glance at the globes, as regretting 
that they were not formed to be taken out into society; but became 
reconciled to leaving them behind.  Instructions were then 
despatched to the Philanthropist for the departure and arrival, in 
good time for dinner, of Mr. Neville and Miss Helena; and stock for 
soup became fragrant in the air of Minor Canon Corner.

In those days there was no railway to Cloisterham, and Mr. Sapsea 
said there never would be.  Mr. Sapsea said more; he said there 
never should be.  And yet, marvellous to consider, it has come to 
pass, in these days, that Express Trains don't think Cloisterham 
worth stopping at, but yell and whirl through it on their larger 
errands, casting the dust off their wheels as a testimony against 
its insignificance.  Some remote fragment of Main Line to somewhere 
else, there was, which was going to ruin the Money Market if it 
failed, and Church and State if it succeeded, and (of course), the 
Constitution, whether or no; but even that had already so unsettled 
Cloisterham traffic, that the traffic, deserting the high road, 
came sneaking in from an unprecedented part of the country by a 
back stable-way, for many years labelled at the corner:  'Beware of 
the Dog.'

To this ignominious avenue of approach, Mr. Crisparkle repaired, 
awaiting the arrival of a short, squat omnibus, with a 
disproportionate heap of luggage on the roof - like a little 
Elephant with infinitely too much Castle - which was then the daily 
service between Cloisterham and external mankind.  As this vehicle 
lumbered up, Mr. Crisparkle could hardly see anything else of it 
for a large outside passenger seated on the box, with his elbows 
squared, and his hands on his knees, compressing the driver into a 
most uncomfortably small compass, and glowering about him with a 
strongly-marked face.

'Is this Cloisterham?' demanded the passenger, in a tremendous 
voice.

'It is,' replied the driver, rubbing himself as if he ached, after 
throwing the reins to the ostler.  'And I never was so glad to see 
it.'

'Tell your master to make his box-seat wider, then,' returned the 
passenger.  'Your master is morally bound - and ought to be 
legally, under ruinous penalties - to provide for the comfort of 
his fellow-man.'

The driver instituted, with the palms of his hands, a superficial 
perquisition into the state of his skeleton; which seemed to make 
him anxious.

'Have I sat upon you?' asked the passenger.

'You have,' said the driver, as if he didn't like it at all.

'Take that card, my friend.'

'I think I won't deprive you on it,' returned the driver, casting 
his eyes over it with no great favour, without taking it.  'What's 
the good of it to me?'

'Be a Member of that Society,' said the passenger.

'What shall I get by it?' asked the driver.

'Brotherhood,' returned the passenger, in a ferocious voice.

'Thankee,' said the driver, very deliberately, as he got down; 'my 
mother was contented with myself, and so am I.  I don't want no 
brothers.'

'But you must have them,' replied the passenger, also descending, 
'whether you like it or not.  I am your brother.'

' I say!' expostulated the driver, becoming more chafed in temper, 
'not too fur!  The worm WILL, when - '

But here, Mr. Crisparkle interposed, remonstrating aside, in a 
friendly voice:  'Joe, Joe, Joe! don't forget yourself, Joe, my 
good fellow!' and then, when Joe peaceably touched his hat, 
accosting the passenger with:  'Mr. Honeythunder?'

'That is my name, sir.'

'My name is Crisparkle.'

'Reverend Mr. Septimus?  Glad to see you, sir.  Neville and Helena 
are inside.  Having a little succumbed of late, under the pressure 
of my public labours, I thought I would take a mouthful of fresh 
air, and come down with them, and return at night.  So you are the 
Reverend Mr. Septimus, are you?' surveying him on the whole with 
disappointment, and twisting a double eyeglass by its ribbon, as if 
he were roasting it, but not otherwise using it.  'Hah!  I expected 
to see you older, sir.'

'I hope you will,' was the good-humoured reply.

'Eh?' demanded Mr. Honeythunder.

'Only a poor little joke.  Not worth repeating.'

'Joke?  Ay; I never see a joke,' Mr. Honeythunder frowningly 
retorted.  'A joke is wasted upon me, sir.  Where are they?  Helena 
and Neville, come here!  Mr. Crisparkle has come down to meet you.'

An unusually handsome lithe young fellow, and an unusually handsome 
lithe girl; much alike; both very dark, and very rich in colour; 
she of almost the gipsy type; something untamed about them both; a 
certain air upon them of hunter and huntress; yet withal a certain 
air of being the objects of the chase, rather than the followers.  
Slender, supple, quick of eye and limb; half shy, half defiant; 
fierce of look; an indefinable kind of pause coming and going on 
their whole expression, both of face and form, which might be 
equally likened to the pause before a crouch or a bound.  The rough 
mental notes made in the first five minutes by Mr. Crisparkle would 
have read thus, VERBATIM.

He invited Mr. Honeythunder to dinner, with a troubled mind (for 
the discomfiture of the dear old china shepherdess lay heavy on 
it), and gave his arm to Helena Landless.  Both she and her 
brother, as they walked all together through the ancient streets, 
took great delight in what he pointed out of the Cathedral and the 
Monastery ruin, and wondered - so his notes ran on - much as if 
they were beautiful barbaric captives brought from some wild 
tropical dominion.  Mr. Honeythunder walked in the middle of the 
road, shouldering the natives out of his way, and loudly developing 
a scheme he had, for making a raid on all the unemployed persons in 
the United Kingdom, laying them every one by the heels in jail, and 
forcing them, on pain of prompt extermination, to become 
philanthropists.

Mrs. Crisparkle had need of her own share of philanthropy when she 
beheld this very large and very loud excrescence on the little 
party.  Always something in the nature of a Boil upon the face of 
society, Mr. Honeythunder expanded into an inflammatory Wen in 
Minor Canon Corner.  Though it was not literally true, as was 
facetiously charged against him by public unbelievers, that he 
called aloud to his fellow-creatures:  'Curse your souls and 
bodies, come here and be blessed!' still his philanthropy was of 
that gunpowderous sort that the difference between it and animosity 
was hard to determine.  You were to abolish military force, but you 
were first to bring all commanding officers who had done their 
duty, to trial by court-martial for that offence, and shoot them.  
You were to abolish war, but were to make converts by making war 
upon them, and charging them with loving war as the apple of their 
eye.  You were to have no capital punishment, but were first to 
sweep off the face of the earth all legislators, jurists, and 
judges, who were of the contrary opinion.  You were to have 
universal concord, and were to get it by eliminating all the people 
who wouldn't, or conscientiously couldn't, be concordant.  You were 
to love your brother as yourself, but after an indefinite interval 
of maligning him (very much as if you hated him), and calling him 
all manner of names.  Above all things, you were to do nothing in 
private, or on your own account.  You were to go to the offices of 
the Haven of Philanthropy, and put your name down as a Member and a 
Professing Philanthropist.  Then, you were to pay up your 
subscription, get your card of membership and your riband and 
medal, and were evermore to live upon a platform, and evermore to 
say what Mr. Honeythunder said, and what the Treasurer said, and 
what the sub-Treasurer said, and what the Committee said, and what 
the sub-Committee said, and what the Secretary said, and what the 
Vice-Secretary said.  And this was usually said in the unanimously-
carried resolution under hand and seal, to the effect:  'That this 
assembled Body of Professing Philanthropists views, with indignant 
scorn and contempt, not unmixed with utter detestation and loathing 
abhorrence' - in short, the baseness of all those who do not belong 
to it, and pledges itself to make as many obnoxious statements as 
possible about them, without being at all particular as to facts.

The dinner was a most doleful breakdown.  The philanthropist 
deranged the symmetry of the table, sat himself in the way of the 
waiting, blocked up the thoroughfare, and drove Mr. Tope (who 
assisted the parlour-maid) to the verge of distraction by passing 
plates and dishes on, over his own head.  Nobody could talk to 
anybody, because he held forth to everybody at once, as if the 
company had no individual existence, but were a Meeting.  He 
impounded the Reverend Mr. Septimus, as an official personage to be 
addressed, or kind of human peg to hang his oratorical hat on, and 
fell into the exasperating habit, common among such orators, of 
impersonating him as a wicked and weak opponent.  Thus, he would 
ask:  'And will you, sir, now stultify yourself by telling me' - 
and so forth, when the innocent man had not opened his lips, nor 
meant to open them.  Or he would say:  'Now see, sir, to what a 
position you are reduced.  I will leave you no escape.  After 
exhausting all the resources of fraud and falsehood, during years 
upon years; after exhibiting a combination of dastardly meanness 
with ensanguined daring, such as the world has not often witnessed; 
you have now the hypocrisy to bend the knee before the most 
degraded of mankind, and to sue and whine and howl for mercy!'  
Whereat the unfortunate Minor Canon would look, in part indignant 
and in part perplexed; while his worthy mother sat bridling, with 
tears in her eyes, and the remainder of the party lapsed into a 
sort of gelatinous state, in which there was no flavour or 
solidity, and very little resistance.

But the gush of philanthropy that burst forth when the departure of 
Mr. Honeythunder began to impend, must have been highly gratifying 
to the feelings of that distinguished man.  His coffee was 
produced, by the special activity of Mr. Tope, a full hour before 
he wanted it.  Mr. Crisparkle sat with his watch in his hand for 
about the same period, lest he should overstay his time.  The four 
young people were unanimous in believing that the Cathedral clock 
struck three-quarters, when it actually struck but one.  Miss 
Twinkleton estimated the distance to the omnibus at five-and-twenty 
minutes' walk, when it was really five.  The affectionate kindness 
of the whole circle hustled him into his greatcoat, and shoved him 
out into the moonlight, as if he were a fugitive traitor with whom 
they sympathised, and a troop of horse were at the back door.  Mr. 
Crisparkle and his new charge, who took him to the omnibus, were so 
fervent in their apprehensions of his catching cold, that they shut 
him up in it instantly and left him, with still half-an-hour to 
spare.

CHAPTER VII - MORE CONFIDENCES THAN ONE

'I KNOW very little of that gentleman, sir,' said Neville to the 
Minor Canon as they turned back.

'You know very little of your guardian?' the Minor Canon repeated.

'Almost nothing!'

'How came he - '

'To BE my guardian?  I'll tell you, sir.  I suppose you know that 
we come (my sister and I) from Ceylon?'

'Indeed, no.'

'I wonder at that.  We lived with a stepfather there.  Our mother 
died there, when we were little children.  We have had a wretched 
existence.  She made him our guardian, and he was a miserly wretch 
who grudged us food to eat, and clothes to wear.  At his death, he 
passed us over to this man; for no better reason that I know of, 
than his being a friend or connexion of his, whose name was always 
in print and catching his attention.'

'That was lately, I suppose?'

'Quite lately, sir.  This stepfather of ours was a cruel brute as 
well as a grinding one.  It is well he died when he did, or I might 
have killed him.'

Mr. Crisparkle stopped short in the moonlight and looked at his 
hopeful pupil in consternation.

'I surprise you, sir?' he said, with a quick change to a submissive 
manner.

'You shock me; unspeakably shock me.'

The pupil hung his head for a little while, as they walked on, and 
then said:  'You never saw him beat your sister.  I have seen him 
beat mine, more than once or twice, and I never forgot it.'

'Nothing,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'not even a beloved and beautiful 
sister's tears under dastardly ill-usage;' he became less severe, 
in spite of himself, as his indignation rose; 'could justify those 
horrible expressions that you used.'

'I am sorry I used them, and especially to you, sir.  I beg to 
recall them.  But permit me to set you right on one point.  You 
spoke of my sister's tears.  My sister would have let him tear her 
to pieces, before she would have let him believe that he could make 
her shed a tear.'

Mr. Crisparkle reviewed those mental notes of his, and was neither 
at all surprised to hear it, nor at all disposed to question it.

'Perhaps you will think it strange, sir,' - this was said in a 
hesitating voice - 'that I should so soon ask you to allow me to 
confide in you, and to have the kindness to hear a word or two from 
me in my defence?'

'Defence?' Mr. Crisparkle repeated.  'You are not on your defence, 
Mr. Neville.'

'I think I am, sir.  At least I know I should be, if you were 
better acquainted with my character.'

'Well, Mr. Neville,' was the rejoinder.  'What if you leave me to 
find it out?'

'Since it is your pleasure, sir,' answered the young man, with a 
quick change in his manner to sullen disappointment:  'since it is 
your pleasure to check me in my impulse, I must submit.'

There was that in the tone of this short speech which made the 
conscientious man to whom it was addressed uneasy.  It hinted to 
him that he might, without meaning it, turn aside a trustfulness 
beneficial to a mis-shapen young mind and perhaps to his own power 
of directing and improving it.  They were within sight of the 
lights in his windows, and he stopped.

'Let us turn back and take a turn or two up and down, Mr. Neville, 
or you may not have time to finish what you wish to say to me.  You 
are hasty in thinking that I mean to check you.  Quite the 
contrary.  I invite your confidence.'

'You have invited it, sir, without knowing it, ever since I came 
here.  I say "ever since," as if I had been here a week.  The truth 
is, we came here (my sister and I) to quarrel with you, and affront 
you, and break away again.'

'Really?' said Mr. Crisparkle, at a dead loss for anything else to 
say.

'You see, we could not know what you were beforehand, sir; could 
we?'

'Clearly not,' said Mr. Crisparkle.

'And having liked no one else with whom we have ever been brought 
into contact, we had made up our minds not to like you.'

'Really?' said Mr. Crisparkle again.

'But we do like you, sir, and we see an unmistakable difference 
between your house and your reception of us, and anything else we 
have ever known.  This - and my happening to be alone with you - 
and everything around us seeming so quiet and peaceful after Mr. 
Honeythunder's departure - and Cloisterham being so old and grave 
and beautiful, with the moon shining on it - these things inclined 
me to open my heart.'

'I quite understand, Mr. Neville.  And it is salutary to listen to 
such influences.'

'In describing my own imperfections, sir, I must ask you not to 
suppose that I am describing my sister's.  She has come out of the 
disadvantages of our miserable life, as much better than I am, as 
that Cathedral tower is higher than those chimneys.'

Mr. Crisparkle in his own breast was not so sure of this.

'I have had, sir, from my earliest remembrance, to suppress a 
deadly and bitter hatred.  This has made me secret and revengeful.  
I have been always tyrannically held down by the strong hand.  This 
has driven me, in my weakness, to the resource of being false and 
mean.  I have been stinted of education, liberty, money, dress, the 
very necessaries of life, the commonest pleasures of childhood, the 
commonest possessions of youth.  This has caused me to be utterly 
wanting in I don't know what emotions, or remembrances, or good 
instincts - I have not even a name for the thing, you see! - that 
you have had to work upon in other young men to whom you have been 
accustomed.'

'This is evidently true.  But this is not encouraging,' thought Mr. 
Crisparkle as they turned again.

'And to finish with, sir:  I have been brought up among abject and 
servile dependents, of an inferior race, and I may easily have 
contracted some affinity with them.  Sometimes, I don't know but 
that it may be a drop of what is tigerish in their blood.'

'As in the case of that remark just now,' thought Mr. Crisparkle.

'In a last word of reference to my sister, sir (we are twin 
children), you ought to know, to her honour, that nothing in our 
misery ever subdued her, though it often cowed me.  When we ran 
away from it (we ran away four times in six years, to be soon 
brought back and cruelly punished), the flight was always of her 
planning and leading.  Each time she dressed as a boy, and showed 
the daring of a man.  I take it we were seven years old when we 
first decamped; but I remember, when I lost the pocket-knife with 
which she was to have cut her hair short, how desperately she tried 
to tear it out, or bite it off.  I have nothing further to say, 
sir, except that I hope you will bear with me and make allowance 
for me.'

'Of that, Mr. Neville, you may be sure,' returned the Minor Canon.  
'I don't preach more than I can help, and I will not repay your 
confidence with a sermon.  But I entreat you to bear in mind, very 
seriously and steadily, that if I am to do you any good, it can 
only be with your own assistance; and that you can only render 
that, efficiently, by seeking aid from Heaven.'

'I will try to do my part, sir.'

'And, Mr. Neville, I will try to do mine.  Here is my hand on it.  
May God bless our endeavours!'

They were now standing at his house-door, and a cheerful sound of 
voices and laughter was heard within.

'We will take one more turn before going in,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 
'for I want to ask you a question.  When you said you were in a 
changed mind concerning me, you spoke, not only for yourself, but 
for your sister too?'

'Undoubtedly I did, sir.'

'Excuse me, Mr. Neville, but I think you have had no opportunity of 
communicating with your sister, since I met you.  Mr. Honeythunder 
was very eloquent; but perhaps I may venture to say, without ill-
nature, that he rather monopolised the occasion.  May you not have 
answered for your sister without sufficient warrant?'

Neville shook his head with a proud smile.

'You don't know, sir, yet, what a complete understanding can exist 
between my sister and me, though no spoken word - perhaps hardly as 
much as a look - may have passed between us.  She not only feels as 
I have described, but she very well knows that I am taking this 
opportunity of speaking to you, both for her and for myself.'

Mr. Crisparkle looked in his face, with some incredulity; but his 
face expressed such absolute and firm conviction of the truth of 
what he said, that Mr. Crisparkle looked at the pavement, and 
mused, until they came to his door again.

'I will ask for one more turn, sir, this time,' said the young man, 
with a rather heightened colour rising in his face.  'But for Mr. 
Honeythunder's - I think you called it eloquence, sir?' (somewhat 
slyly.)

'I - yes, I called it eloquence,' said Mr. Crisparkle.

'But for Mr. Honeythunder's eloquence, I might have had no need to 
ask you what I am going to ask you.  This Mr. Edwin Drood, sir:  I 
think that's the name?'

'Quite correct,' said Mr. Crisparkle.  'D-r-double o-d.'

'Does he - or did he - read with you, sir?'

'Never, Mr. Neville.  He comes here visiting his relation, Mr. 
Jasper.'

'Is Miss Bud his relation too, sir?'

('Now, why should he ask that, with sudden superciliousness?' 
thought Mr. Crisparkle.)  Then he explained, aloud, what he knew of 
the little story of their betrothal.

'O! THAT'S it, is it?' said the young man.  'I understand his air 
of proprietorship now!'

This was said so evidently to himself, or to anybody rather than 
Mr. Crisparkle, that the latter instinctively felt as if to notice 
it would be almost tantamount to noticing a passage in a letter 
which he had read by chance over the writer's shoulder.  A moment 
afterwards they re-entered the house.

Mr. Jasper was seated at the piano as they came into his drawing-
room, and was accompanying Miss Rosebud while she sang.  It was a 
consequence of his playing the accompaniment without notes, and of 
her being a heedless little creature, very apt to go wrong, that he 
followed her lips most attentively, with his eyes as well as hands; 
carefully and softly hinting the key-note from time to time.  
Standing with an arm drawn round her, but with a face far more 
intent on Mr. Jasper than on her singing, stood Helena, between 
whom and her brother an instantaneous recognition passed, in which 
Mr. Crisparkle saw, or thought he saw, the understanding that had 
been spoken of, flash out.  Mr. Neville then took his admiring 
station, leaning against the piano, opposite the singer; Mr. 
Crisparkle sat down by the china shepherdess; Edwin Drood gallantly 
furled and unfurled Miss Twinkleton's fan; and that lady passively 
claimed that sort of exhibitor's proprietorship in the 
accomplishment on view, which Mr. Tope, the Verger, daily claimed 
in the Cathedral service.

The song went on.  It was a sorrowful strain of parting, and the 
fresh young voice was very plaintive and tender.  As Jasper watched 
the pretty lips, and ever and again hinted the one note, as though 
it were a low whisper from himself, the voice became less steady, 
until all at once the singer broke into a burst of tears, and 
shrieked out, with her hands over her eyes:  'I can't bear this!  I 
am frightened!  Take me away!'

With one swift turn of her lithe figures Helena laid the little 
beauty on a sofa, as if she had never caught her up.  Then, on one 
knee beside her, and with one hand upon her rosy mouth, while with 
the other she appealed to all the rest, Helena said to them:  'It's 
nothing; it's all over; don't speak to her for one minute, and she 
is well!'

Jasper's hands had, in the same instant, lifted themselves from the 
keys, and were now poised above them, as though he waited to 
resume.  In that attitude he yet sat quiet:  not even looking 
round, when all the rest had changed their places and were 
reassuring one another.

'Pussy's not used to an audience; that's the fact,' said Edwin 
Drood.  'She got nervous, and couldn't hold out.  Besides, Jack, 
you are such a conscientious master, and require so much, that I 
believe you make her afraid of you.  No wonder.'

'No wonder,' repeated Helena.

'There, Jack, you hear!  You would be afraid of him, under similar 
circumstances, wouldn't you, Miss Landless?'

'Not under any circumstances,' returned Helena.

Jasper brought down his hands, looked over his shoulder, and begged 
to thank Miss Landless for her vindication of his character.  Then 
he fell to dumbly playing, without striking the notes, while his 
little pupil was taken to an open window for air, and was otherwise 
petted and restored.  When she was brought back, his place was 
empty.  'Jack's gone, Pussy,' Edwin told her.  'I am more than half 
afraid he didn't like to be charged with being the Monster who had 
frightened you.'  But she answered never a word, and shivered, as 
if they had made her a little too cold.

Miss Twinkleton now opining that indeed these were late hours, Mrs. 
Crisparkle, for finding ourselves outside the walls of the Nuns' 
House, and that we who undertook the formation of the future wives 
and mothers of England (the last words in a lower voice, as 
requiring to be communicated in confidence) were really bound 
(voice coming up again) to set a better example than one of rakish 
habits, wrappers were put in requisition, and the two young 
cavaliers volunteered to see the ladies home.  It was soon done, 
and the gate of the Nuns' House closed upon them.

The boarders had retired, and only Mrs. Tisher in solitary vigil 
awaited the new pupil.  Her bedroom being within Rosa's, very 
little introduction or explanation was necessary, before she was 
placed in charge of her new friend, and left for the night.

'This is a blessed relief, my dear,' said Helena.  'I have been 
dreading all day, that I should be brought to bay at this time.'

'There are not many of us,' returned Rosa, 'and we are good-natured 
girls; at least the others are; I can answer for them.'

'I can answer for you,' laughed Helena, searching the lovely little 
face with her dark, fiery eyes, and tenderly caressing the small 
figure.  'You will be a friend to me, won't you?'

'I hope so.  But the idea of my being a friend to you seems too 
absurd, though.'

'Why?'

'O, I am such a mite of a thing, and you are so womanly and 
handsome.  You seem to have resolution and power enough to crush 
me.  I shrink into nothing by the side of your presence even.'

'I am a neglected creature, my dear, unacquainted with all 
accomplishments, sensitively conscious that I have everything to 
learn, and deeply ashamed to own my ignorance.'

'And yet you acknowledge everything to me!' said Rosa.

'My pretty one, can I help it?  There is a fascination in you.'

'O! is there though?' pouted Rosa, half in jest and half in 
earnest.  'What a pity Master Eddy doesn't feel it more!'

Of course her relations towards that young gentleman had been 
already imparted in Minor Canon Corner.

'Why, surely he must love you with all his heart!' cried Helena, 
with an earnestness that threatened to blaze into ferocity if he 
didn't.

'Eh?  O, well, I suppose he does,' said Rosa, pouting again; 'I am 
sure I have no right to say he doesn't.  Perhaps it's my fault.  
Perhaps I am not as nice to him as I ought to be.  I don't think I 
am.  But it IS so ridiculous!'

Helena's eyes demanded what was.

'WE are,' said Rosa, answering as if she had spoken.  'We are such 
a ridiculous couple.  And we are always quarrelling.'

'Why?'

'Because we both know we are ridiculous, my dear!'  Rosa gave that 
answer as if it were the most conclusive answer in the world.

Helena's masterful look was intent upon her face for a few moments, 
and then she impulsively put out both her hands and said:

'You will be my friend and help me?'

'Indeed, my dear, I will,' replied Rosa, in a tone of affectionate 
childishness that went straight and true to her heart; 'I will be 
as good a friend as such a mite of a thing can be to such a noble 
creature as you.  And be a friend to me, please; I don't understand 
myself:  and I want a friend who can understand me, very much 
indeed.'

Helena Landless kissed her, and retaining both her hands said:

'Who is Mr. Jasper?'

Rosa turned aside her head in answering:  'Eddy's uncle, and my 
music-master.'

'You do not love him?'

'Ugh!'  She put her hands up to her face, and shook with fear or 
horror.

'You know that he loves you?'

'O, don't, don't, don't!' cried Rosa, dropping on her knees, and 
clinging to her new resource.  'Don't tell me of it!  He terrifies 
me.  He haunts my thoughts, like a dreadful ghost.  I feel that I 
am never safe from him.  I feel as if he could pass in through the 
wall when he is spoken of.'  She actually did look round, as if she 
dreaded to see him standing in the shadow behind her.

'Try to tell me more about it, darling.'

'Yes, I will, I will.  Because you are so strong.  But hold me the 
while, and stay with me afterwards.'

'My child!  You speak as if he had threatened you in some dark 
way.'

'He has never spoken to me about - that.  Never.'

'What has he done?'

'He has made a slave of me with his looks.  He has forced me to 
understand him, without his saying a word; and he has forced me to 
keep silence, without his uttering a threat.  When I play, he never 
moves his eyes from my hands.  When I sing, he never moves his eyes 
from my lips.  When he corrects me, and strikes a note, or a chord, 
or plays a passage, he himself is in the sounds, whispering that he 
pursues me as a lover, and commanding me to keep his secret.  I 
avoid his eyes, but he forces me to see them without looking at 
them.  Even when a glaze comes over them (which is sometimes the 
case), and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream 
in which he threatens most, he obliges me to know it, and to know 
that he is sitting close at my side, more terrible to me than 
ever.'

'What is this imagined threatening, pretty one?  What is 
threatened?'

'I don't know.  I have never even dared to think or wonder what it 
is.'

'And was this all, to-night?'

'This was all; except that to-night when he watched my lips so 
closely as I was singing, besides feeling terrified I felt ashamed 
and passionately hurt.  It was as if he kissed me, and I couldn't 
bear it, but cried out.  You must never breathe this to any one.  
Eddy is devoted to him.  But you said to-night that you would not 
be afraid of him, under any circumstances, and that gives me - who 
am so much afraid of him - courage to tell only you.  Hold me!  
Stay with me!  I am too frightened to be left by myself.'

The lustrous gipsy-face drooped over the clinging arms and bosom, 
and the wild black hair fell down protectingly over the childish 
form.  There was a slumbering gleam of fire in the intense dark 
eyes, though they were then softened with compassion and 
admiration.  Let whomsoever it most concerned look well to it!

CHAPTER VIII - DAGGERS DRAWN

THE two young men, having seen the damsels, their charges, enter 
the courtyard of the Nuns' House, and finding themselves coldly 
stared at by the brazen door-plate, as if the battered old beau 
with the glass in his eye were insolent, look at one another, look 
along the perspective of the moonlit street, and slowly walk away 
together.

'Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?' says Neville.

'Not this time,' is the careless answer.  'I leave for London 
again, to-morrow.  But I shall be here, off and on, until next 
Midsummer; then I shall take my leave of Cloisterham, and England 
too; for many a long day, I expect.'

'Are you going abroad?'

'Going to wake up Egypt a little,' is the condescending answer.

'Are you reading?'

'Reading?' repeats Edwin Drood, with a touch of contempt.  'No.  
Doing, working, engineering.  My small patrimony was left a part of 
the capital of the Firm I am with, by my father, a former partner; 
and I am a charge upon the Firm until I come of age; and then I 
step into my modest share in the concern.  Jack - you met him at 
dinner - is, until then, my guardian and trustee.'

'I heard from Mr. Crisparkle of your other good fortune.'

'What do you mean by my other good fortune?'

Neville has made his remark in a watchfully advancing, and yet 
furtive and shy manner, very expressive of that peculiar air 
already noticed, of being at once hunter and hunted.  Edwin has 
made his retort with an abruptness not at all polite.  They stop 
and interchange a rather heated look.

'I hope,' says Neville, 'there is no offence, Mr. Drood, in my 
innocently referring to your betrothal?'

'By George!' cries Edwin, leading on again at a somewhat quicker 
pace; 'everybody in this chattering old Cloisterham refers to it I 
wonder no public-house has been set up, with my portrait for the 
sign of The Betrothed's Head.  Or Pussy's portrait.  One or the 
other.'

'I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle's mentioning the matter to 
me, quite openly,' Neville begins.

'No; that's true; you are not,' Edwin Drood assents.

'But,' resumes Neville, 'I am accountable for mentioning it to you.  
And I did so, on the supposition that you could not fail to be 
highly proud of it.'

Now, there are these two curious touches of human nature working 
the secret springs of this dialogue.  Neville Landless is already 
enough impressed by Little Rosebud, to feel indignant that Edwin 
Drood (far below her) should hold his prize so lightly.  Edwin 
Drood is already enough impressed by Helena, to feel indignant that 
Helena's brother (far below her) should dispose of him so coolly, 
and put him out of the way so entirely.

However, the last remark had better be answered.  So, says Edwin:

'I don't know, Mr. Neville' (adopting that mode of address from Mr. 
Crisparkle), 'that what people are proudest of, they usually talk 
most about; I don't know either, that what they are proudest of, 
they most like other people to talk about.  But I live a busy life, 
and I speak under correction by you readers, who ought to know 
everything, and I daresay do.'

By this time they had both become savage; Mr. Neville out in the 
open; Edwin Drood under the transparent cover of a popular tune, 
and a stop now and then to pretend to admire picturesque effects in 
the moonlight before him.

'It does not seem to me very civil in you,' remarks Neville, at 
length, 'to reflect upon a stranger who comes here, not having had 
your advantages, to try to make up for lost time.  But, to be sure, 
I was not brought up in "busy life," and my ideas of civility were 
formed among Heathens.'

'Perhaps, the best civility, whatever kind of people we are brought 
up among,' retorts Edwin Drood, 'is to mind our own business.  If 
you will set me that example, I promise to follow it.'

'Do you know that you take a great deal too much upon yourself?' is 
the angry rejoinder, 'and that in the part of the world I come 
from, you would be called to account for it?'

'By whom, for instance?' asks Edwin Drood, coming to a halt, and 
surveying the other with a look of disdain.

But, here a startling right hand is laid on Edwin's shoulder, and 
Jasper stands between them.  For, it would seem that he, too, has 
strolled round by the Nuns' House, and has come up behind them on 
the shadowy side of the road.

'Ned, Ned, Ned!' he says; 'we must have no more of this.  I don't 
like this.  I have overheard high words between you two.  Remember, 
my dear boy, you are almost in the position of host to-night.  You 
belong, as it were, to the place, and in a manner represent it 
towards a stranger.  Mr. Neville is a stranger, and you should 
respect the obligations of hospitality.  And, Mr. Neville,' laying 
his left hand on the inner shoulder of that young gentleman, and 
thus walking on between them, hand to shoulder on either side:  
'you will pardon me; but I appeal to you to govern your temper too.  
Now, what is amiss?  But why ask!  Let there be nothing amiss, and 
the question is superfluous.  We are all three on a good 
understanding, are we not?'

After a silent struggle between the two young men who shall speak 
last, Edwin Drood strikes in with:  'So far as I am concerned, 
Jack, there is no anger in me.'

'Nor in me,' says Neville Landless, though not so freely; or 
perhaps so carelessly.  'But if Mr. Drood knew all that lies behind 
me, far away from here, he might know better how it is that sharp-
edged words have sharp edges to wound me.'

'Perhaps,' says Jasper, in a soothing manner, 'we had better not 
qualify our good understanding.  We had better not say anything 
having the appearance of a remonstrance or condition; it might not 
seem generous.  Frankly and freely, you see there is no anger in 
Ned.  Frankly and freely, there is no anger in you, Mr. Neville?'

'None at all, Mr. Jasper.'  Still, not quite so frankly or so 
freely; or, be it said once again, not quite so carelessly perhaps.

'All over then!  Now, my bachelor gatehouse is a few yards from 
here, and the heater is on the fire, and the wine and glasses are 
on the table, and it is not a stone's throw from Minor Canon 
Corner.  Ned, you are up and away to-morrow.  We will carry Mr. 
Neville in with us, to take a stirrup-cup.'

'With all my heart, Jack.'

'And with all mine, Mr. Jasper.'  Neville feels it impossible to 
say less, but would rather not go.  He has an impression upon him 
that he has lost hold of his temper; feels that Edwin Drood's 
coolness, so far from being infectious, makes him red-hot.

Mr. Jasper, still walking in the centre, hand to shoulder on either 
side, beautifully turns the Refrain of a drinking song, and they 
all go up to his rooms.  There, the first object visible, when he 
adds the light of a lamp to that of the fire, is the portrait over 
the chimneypicce.  It is not an object calculated to improve the 
understanding between the two young men, as rather awkwardly 
reviving the subject of their difference.  Accordingly, they both 
glance at it consciously, but say nothing.  Jasper, however (who 
would appear from his conduct to have gained but an imperfect clue 
to the cause of their late high words), directly calls attention to 
it.

'You recognise that picture, Mr. Neville?' shading the lamp to 
throw the light upon it.

'I recognise it, but it is far from flattering the original.'

'O, you are hard upon it!  It was done by Ned, who made me a 
present of it.'

'I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood.'  Neville apologises, with a real 
intention to apologise; 'if I had known I was in the artist's 
presence - '

'O, a joke, sir, a mere joke,' Edwin cuts in, with a provoking 
yawn.  'A little humouring of Pussy's points!  I'm going to paint 
her gravely, one of these days, if she's good.'

The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this is 
said, as the speaker throws himself back in a chair and clasps his 
hands at the back of his head, as a rest for it, is very 
exasperating to the excitable and excited Neville.  Jasper looks 
observantly from the one to the other, slightly smiles, and turns 
his back to mix a jug of mulled wine at the fire.  It seems to 
require much mixing and compounding.

'I suppose, Mr. Neville,' says Edwin, quick to resent the indignant 
protest against himself in the face of young Landless, which is 
fully as visible as the portrait, or the fire, or the lamp:  'I 
suppose that if you painted the picture of your lady love - '

'I can't paint,' is the hasty interruption.

'That's your misfortune, and not your fault.  You would if you 
could.  But if you could, I suppose you would make her (no matter 
what she was in reality), Juno, Minerva, Diana, and Venus, all in 
one.  Eh?'

'I have no lady love, and I can't say.'

'If I were to try my hand,' says Edwin, with a boyish boastfulness 
getting up in him, 'on a portrait of Miss Landless - in earnest, 
mind you; in earnest - you should see what I could do!'

'My sister's consent to sit for it being first got, I suppose?  As 
it never will be got, I am afraid I shall never see what you can 
do.  I must bear the loss.'

Jasper turns round from the fire, fills a large goblet glass for 
Neville, fills a large goblet glass for Edwin, and hands each his 
own; then fills for himself, saying:

'Come, Mr. Neville, we are to drink to my nephew, Ned.  As it is 
his foot that is in the stirrup - metaphorically - our stirrup-cup 
is to be devoted to him.  Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!'

Jasper sets the example of nearly emptying his glass, and Neville 
follows it.  Edwin Drood says, 'Thank you both very much,' and 
follows the double example.

'Look at him,' cries Jasper, stretching out his hand admiringly and 
tenderly, though rallyingly too.  'See where he lounges so easily, 
Mr. Neville!  The world is all before him where to choose.  A life 
of stirring work and interest, a life of change and excitement, a 
life of domestic ease and love!  Look at him!'

Edwin Drood's face has become quickly and remarkably flushed with 
the wine; so has the face of Neville Landless.  Edwin still sits 
thrown back in his chair, making that rest of clasped hands for his 
head.

'See how little he heeds it all!'  Jasper proceeds in a bantering 
vein.  'It is hardly worth his while to pluck the golden fruit that 
hangs ripe on the tree for him.  And yet consider the contrast, Mr. 
Neville.  You and I have no prospect of stirring work and interest, 
or of change and excitement, or of domestic ease and love.  You and 
I have no prospect (unless you are more fortunate than I am, which 
may easily be), but the tedious unchanging round of this dull 
place.'

'Upon my soul, Jack,' says Edwin, complacently, 'I feel quite 
apologetic for having my way smoothed as you describe.  But you 
know what I know, Jack, and it may not be so very easy as it seems, 
after all.  May it, Pussy?'  To the portrait, with a snap of his 
thumb and finger.  'We have got to hit it off yet; haven't we, 
Pussy?  You know what I mean, Jack.'

His speech has become thick and indistinct.  Jasper, quiet and 
self-possessed, looks to Neville, as expecting his answer or 
comment.  When Neville speaks, HIS speech is also thick and 
indistinct.

'It might have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some 
hardships,' he says, defiantly.

'Pray,' retorts Edwin, turning merely his eyes in that direction, 
'pray why might it have been better for Mr. Drood to have known 
some hardships?'

'Ay,' Jasper assents, with an air of interest; 'let us know why?'

'Because they might have made him more sensible,' says Neville, 'of 
good fortune that is not by any means necessarily the result of his 
own merits.'

Mr. Jasper quickly looks to his nephew for his rejoinder.

'Have YOU known hardships, may I ask?' says Edwin Drood, sitting 
upright.

Mr. Jasper quickly looks to the other for his retort.

'I have.'

'And what have they made you sensible of?'

Mr. Jasper's play of eyes between the two holds good throughout the 
dialogue, to the end.

'I have told you once before to-night.'

'You have done nothing of the sort.'

'I tell you I have.  That you take a great deal too much upon 
yourself.'

'You added something else to that, if I remember?'

'Yes, I did say something else.'

'Say it again.'

'I said that in the part of the world I come from, you would be 
called to account for it.'

'Only there?' cries Edwin Drood, with a contemptuous laugh.  'A 
long way off, I believe?  Yes; I see!  That part of the world is at 
a safe distance.'

'Say here, then,' rejoins the other, rising in a fury.  'Say 
anywhere!  Your vanity is intolerable, your conceit is beyond 
endurance; you talk as if you were some rare and precious prize, 
instead of a common boaster.  You are a common fellow, and a common 
boaster.'

'Pooh, pooh,' says Edwin Drood, equally furious, but more 
collected; 'how should you know?  You may know a black common 
fellow, or a black common boaster, when you see him (and no doubt 
you have a large acquaintance that way); but you are no judge of 
white men.'

This insulting allusion to his dark skin infuriates Neville to that 
violent degree, that he flings the dregs of his wine at Edwin 
Drood, and is in the act of flinging the goblet after it, when his 
arm is caught in the nick of time by Jasper.

'Ned, my dear fellow!' he cries in a loud voice; 'I entreat you, I 
command you, to be still!'  There has been a rush of all the three, 
and a clattering of glasses and overturning of chairs.  'Mr. 
Neville, for shame!  Give this glass to me.  Open your hand, sir.  
I WILL have it!'

But Neville throws him off, and pauses for an instant, in a raging 
passion, with the goblet yet in his uplifted hand.  Then, he dashes 
it down under the grate, with such force that the broken splinters 
fly out again in a shower; and he leaves the house.

When he first emerges into the night air, nothing around him is 
still or steady; nothing around him shows like what it is; he only 
knows that he stands with a bare head in the midst of a blood-red 
whirl, waiting to be struggled with, and to struggle to the death.

But, nothing happening, and the moon looking down upon him as if he 
were dead after a fit of wrath, he holds his steam-hammer beating 
head and heart, and staggers away.  Then, he becomes half-conscious 
of having heard himself bolted and barred out, like a dangerous 
animal; and thinks what shall he do?

Some wildly passionate ideas of the river dissolve under the spell 
of the moonlight on the Cathedral and the graves, and the 
remembrance of his sister, and the thought of what he owes to the 
good man who has but that very day won his confidence and given him 
his pledge.  He repairs to Minor Canon Corner, and knocks softly at 
the door.

It is Mr. Crisparkle's custom to sit up last of the early 
household, very softly touching his piano and practising his 
favourite parts in concerted vocal music.  The south wind that goes 
where it lists, by way of Minor Canon Corner on a still night, is 
not more subdued than Mr. Crisparkle at such times, regardful of 
the slumbers of the china shepherdess.

His knock is immediately answered by Mr. Crisparkle himself.  When 
he opens the door, candle in hand, his cheerful face falls, and 
disappointed amazement is in it.

'Mr. Neville!  In this disorder!  Where have you been?'

'I have been to Mr. Jasper's, sir.  With his nephew.'

'Come in.'

The Minor Canon props him by the elbow with a strong hand (in a 
strictly scientific manner, worthy of his morning trainings), and 
turns him into his own little book-room, and shuts the door.'

'I have begun ill, sir.  I have begun dreadfully ill.'

'Too true.  You are not sober, Mr. Neville.'

'I am afraid I am not, sir, though I can satisfy you at another 
time that I have had a very little indeed to drink, and that it 
overcame me in the strangest and most sudden manner.'

'Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville,' says the Minor Canon, shaking his head 
with a sorrowful smile; 'I have heard that said before.'

'I think - my mind is much confused, but I think - it is equally 
true of Mr. Jasper's nephew, sir.'

'Very likely,' is the dry rejoinder.

'We quarrelled, sir.  He insulted me most grossly.  He had heated 
that tigerish blood I told you of to-day, before then.'

'Mr. Neville,' rejoins the Minor Canon, mildly, but firmly:  'I 
request you not to speak to me with that clenched right hand.  
Unclench it, if you please.'

'He goaded me, sir,' pursues the young man, instantly obeying, 
'beyond my power of endurance.  I cannot say whether or no he meant 
it at first, but he did it.  He certainly meant it at last.  In 
short, sir,' with an irrepressible outburst, 'in the passion into 
which he lashed me, I would have cut him down if I could, and I 
tried to do it.'

'You have clenched that hand again,' is Mr. Crisparkle's quiet 
commentary.

'I beg your pardon, sir.'

'You know your room, for I showed it you before dinner; but I will 
accompany you to it once more.  Your arm, if you please.  Softly, 
for the house is all a-bed.'

Scooping his hand into the same scientific elbow-rest as before, 
and backing it up with the inert strength of his arm, as skilfully 
as a Police Expert, and with an apparent repose quite unattainable 
by novices, Mr. Crisparkle conducts his pupil to the pleasant and 
orderly old room prepared for him.  Arrived there, the young man 
throws himself into a chair, and, flinging his arms upon his 
reading-table, rests his head upon them with an air of wretched 
self-reproach.

The gentle Minor Canon has had it in his thoughts to leave the 
room, without a word.  But looking round at the door, and seeing 
this dejected figure, he turns back to it, touches it with a mild 
hand, says 'Good night!'  A sob is his only acknowledgment.  He 
might have had many a worse; perhaps, could have had few better.

Another soft knock at the outer door attracts his attention as he 
goes down-stairs.  He opens it to Mr. Jasper, holding in his hand 
the pupil's hat.

'We have had an awful scene with him,' says Jasper, in a low voice.

'Has it been so bad as that?'

'Murderous!'

Mr. Crisparkle remonstrates:  'No, no, no.  Do not use such strong 
words.'

'He might have laid my dear boy dead at my feet.  It is no fault of 
his, that he did not.  But that I was, through the mercy of God, 
swift and strong with him, he would have cut him down on my 
hearth.'

The phrase smites home.  'Ah!' thinks Mr. Crisparkle, 'his own 
words!'

'Seeing what I have seen to-night, and hearing what I have heard,' 
adds Jasper, with great earnestness, 'I shall never know peace of 
mind when there is danger of those two coming together, with no one 
else to interfere.  It was horrible.  There is something of the 
tiger in his dark blood.'

'Ah!' thinks Mr. Crisparkle, 'so he said!'

'You, my dear sir,' pursues Jasper, taking his hand, 'even you, 
have accepted a dangerous charge.'

'You need have no fear for me, Jasper,' returns Mr. Crisparkle, 
with a quiet smile.  'I have none for myself.'

'I have none for myself,' returns Jasper, with an emphasis on the 
last pronoun, 'because I am not, nor am I in the way of being, the 
object of his hostility.  But you may be, and my dear boy has been.  
Good night!'

Mr. Crisparkle goes in, with the hat that has so easily, so almost 
imperceptibly, acquired the right to be hung up in his hall; hangs 
it up; and goes thoughtfully to bed.

CHAPTER IX - BIRDS IN THE BUSH

ROSA, having no relation that she knew of in the world, had, from 
the seventh year of her age, known no home but the Nuns' House, and 
no mother but Miss Twinkleton.  Her remembrance of her own mother 
was of a pretty little creature like herself (not much older than 
herself it seemed to her), who had been brought home in her 
father's arms, drowned.  The fatal accident had happened at a party 
of pleasure.  Every fold and colour in the pretty summer dress, and 
even the long wet hair, with scattered petals of ruined flowers 
still clinging to it, as the dead young figure, in its sad, sad 
beauty lay upon the bed, were fixed indelibly in Rosa's 
recollection.  So were the wild despair and the subsequent bowed-
down grief of her poor young father, who died broken-hearted on the 
first anniversary of that hard day.

The betrothal of Rosa grew out of the soothing of his year of 
mental distress by his fast friend and old college companion, 
Drood:  who likewise had been left a widower in his youth.  But he, 
too, went the silent road into which all earthly pilgrimages merge, 
some sooner, and some later; and thus the young couple had come to 
be as they were.

The atmosphere of pity surrounding the little orphan girl when she 
first came to Cloisterham, had never cleared away.  It had taken 
brighter hues as she grew older, happier, prettier; now it had been 
golden, now roseate, and now azure; but it had always adorned her 
with some soft light of its own.  The general desire to console and 
caress her, had caused her to be treated in the beginning as a 
child much younger than her years; the same desire had caused her 
to be still petted when she was a child no longer.  Who should be 
her favourite, who should anticipate this or that small present, or 
do her this or that small service; who should take her home for the 
holidays; who should write to her the oftenest when they were 
separated, and whom she would most rejoice to see again when they 
were reunited; even these gentle rivalries were not without their 
slight dashes of bitterness in the Nuns' House.  Well for the poor 
Nuns in their day, if they hid no harder strife under their veils 
and rosaries!

Thus Rosa had grown to be an amiable, giddy, wilful, winning little 
creature; spoilt, in the sense of counting upon kindness from all 
around her; but not in the sense of repaying it with indifference.  
Possessing an exhaustless well of affection in her nature, its 
sparkling waters had freshened and brightened the Nuns' House for 
years, and yet its depths had never yet been moved:  what might 
betide when that came to pass; what developing changes might fall 
upon the heedless head, and light heart, then; remained to be seen.

By what means the news that there had been a quarrel between the 
two young men overnight, involving even some kind of onslaught by 
Mr. Neville upon Edwin Drood, got into Miss Twinkleton's 
establishment before breakfast, it is impossible to say.  Whether 
it was brought in by the birds of the air, or came blowing in with 
the very air itself, when the casement windows were set open; 
whether the baker brought it kneaded into the bread, or the milkman 
delivered it as part of the adulteration of his milk; or the 
housemaids, beating the dust out of their mats against the 
gateposts, received it in exchange deposited on the mats by the 
town atmosphere; certain it is that the news permeated every gable 
of the old building before Miss Twinkleton was down, and that Miss 
Twinkleton herself received it through Mrs. Tisher, while yet in 
the act of dressing; or (as she might have expressed the phrase to 
a parent or guardian of a mythological turn) of sacrificing to the 
Graces.

Miss Landless's brother had thrown a bottle at Mr. Edwin Drood.

Miss Landless's brother had thrown a knife at Mr. Edwin Drood.

A knife became suggestive of a fork; and Miss Landless's brother 
had thrown a fork at Mr. Edwin Drood.

As in the governing precedence of Peter Piper, alleged to have 
picked the peck of pickled pepper, it was held physically desirable 
to have evidence of the existence of the peck of pickled pepper 
which Peter Piper was alleged to have picked; so, in this case, it 
was held psychologically important to know why Miss Landless's 
brother threw a bottle, knife, or fork-or bottle, knife, AND fork - 
for the cook had been given to understand it was all three - at Mr. 
Edwin Drood?

Well, then.  Miss Landless's brother had said he admired Miss Bud.  
Mr. Edwin Drood had said to Miss Landless's brother that he had no 
business to admire Miss Bud.  Miss Landless's brother had then 
'up'd' (this was the cook's exact information) with the bottle, 
knife, fork, and decanter (the decanter now coolly flying at 
everybody's head, without the least introduction), and thrown them 
all at Mr. Edwin Drood.

Poor little Rosa put a forefinger into each of her ears when these 
rumours began to circulate, and retired into a corner, beseeching 
not to be told any more; but Miss Landless, begging permission of 
Miss Twinkleton to go and speak with her brother, and pretty 
plainly showing that she would take it if it were not given, struck 
out the more definite course of going to Mr. Crisparkle's for 
accurate intelligence.

When she came back (being first closeted with Miss Twinkleton, in 
order that anything objectionable in her tidings might be retained 
by that discreet filter), she imparted to Rosa only, what had taken 
place; dwelling with a flushed cheek on the provocation her brother 
had received, but almost limiting it to that last gross affront as 
crowning 'some other words between them,' and, out of consideration 
for her new friend, passing lightly over the fact that the other 
words had originated in her lover's taking things in general so 
very easily.  To Rosa direct, she brought a petition from her 
brother that she would forgive him; and, having delivered it with 
sisterly earnestness, made an end of the subject.

It was reserved for Miss Twinkleton to tone down the public mind of 
the Nuns' House.  That lady, therefore, entering in a stately 
manner what plebeians might have called the school-room, but what, 
in the patrician language of the head of the Nuns' House, was 
euphuistically, not to say round-aboutedly, denominated 'the 
apartment allotted to study,' and saying with a forensic air, 
'Ladies!' all rose.  Mrs. Tisher at the same time grouped herself 
behind her chief, as representing Queen Elizabeth's first 
historical female friend at Tilbury fort.  Miss Twinkleton then 
proceeded to remark that Rumour, Ladies, had been represented by 
the bard of Avon - needless were it to mention the immortal 
SHAKESPEARE, also called the Swan of his native river, not 
improbably with some reference to the ancient superstition that 
that bird of graceful plumage (Miss Jennings will please stand 
upright) sang sweetly on the approach of death, for which we have 
no ornithological authority, - Rumour, Ladies, had been represented 
by that bard - hem! -

'who drew
The celebrated Jew,'

as painted full of tongues.  Rumour in Cloisterham (Miss Ferdinand 
will honour me with her attention) was no exception to the great 
limner's portrait of Rumour elsewhere.  A slight FRACAS between two 
young gentlemen occurring last night within a hundred miles of 
these peaceful walls (Miss Ferdinand, being apparently 
incorrigible, will have the kindness to write out this evening, in 
the original language, the first four fables of our vivacious 
neighbour, Monsieur La Fontaine) had been very grossly exaggerated 
by Rumour's voice.  In the first alarm and anxiety arising from our 
sympathy with a sweet young friend, not wholly to be dissociated 
from one of the gladiators in the bloodless arena in question (the 
impropriety of Miss Reynolds's appearing to stab herself in the 
hand with a pin, is far too obvious, and too glaringly unladylike, 
to be pointed out), we descended from our maiden elevation to 
discuss this uncongenial and this unfit theme.  Responsible 
inquiries having assured us that it was but one of those 'airy 
nothings' pointed at by the Poet (whose name and date of birth Miss 
Giggles will supply within half an hour), we would now discard the 
subject, and concentrate our minds upon the grateful labours of the 
day.

But the subject so survived all day, nevertheless, that Miss 
Ferdinand got into new trouble by surreptitiously clapping on a 
paper moustache at dinner-time, and going through the motions of 
aiming a water-bottle at Miss Giggles, who drew a table-spoon in 
defence.

Now, Rosa thought of this unlucky quarrel a great deal, and thought 
of it with an uncomfortable feeling that she was involved in it, as 
cause, or consequence, or what not, through being in a false 
position altogether as to her marriage engagement.  Never free from 
such uneasiness when she was with her affianced husband, it was not 
likely that she would be free from it when they were apart.  To-
day, too, she was cast in upon herself, and deprived of the relief 
of talking freely with her new friend, because the quarrel had been 
with Helena's brother, and Helena undisguisedly avoided the subject 
as a delicate and difficult one to herself.  At this critical time, 
of all times, Rosa's guardian was announced as having come to see 
her.

Mr. Grewgious had been well selected for his trust, as a man of 
incorruptible integrity, but certainly for no other appropriate 
quality discernible on the surface.  He was an arid, sandy man, 
who, if he had been put into a grinding-mill, looked as if he would 
have ground immediately into high-dried snuff.  He had a scanty 
flat crop of hair, in colour and consistency like some very mangy 
yellow fur tippet; it was so unlike hair, that it must have been a 
wig, but for the stupendous improbability of anybody's voluntarily 
sporting such a head.  The little play of feature that his face 
presented, was cut deep into it, in a few hard curves that made it 
more like work; and he had certain notches in his forehead, which 
looked as though Nature had been about to touch them into 
sensibility or refinement, when she had impatiently thrown away the 
chisel, and said:  'I really cannot be worried to finish off this 
man; let him go as he is.'

With too great length of throat at his upper end, and too much 
ankle-bone and heel at his lower; with an awkward and hesitating 
manner; with a shambling walk; and with what is called a near sight 
- which perhaps prevented his observing how much white cotton 
stocking he displayed to the public eye, in contrast with his black 
suit - Mr. Grewgious still had some strange capacity in him of 
making on the whole an agreeable impression.

Mr. Grewgious was discovered by his ward, much discomfited by being 
in Miss Twinkleton's company in Miss Twinkleton's own sacred room.  
Dim forebodings of being examined in something, and not coming well 
out of it, seemed to oppress the poor gentleman when found in these 
circumstances.

'My dear, how do you do?  I am glad to see you.  My dear, how much 
improved you are.  Permit me to hand you a chair, my dear.'

Miss Twinkleton rose at her little writing-table, saying, with 
general sweetness, as to the polite Universe:  'Will you permit me 
to retire?'

'By no means, madam, on my account.  I beg that you will not move.'

'I must entreat permission to MOVE,' returned Miss Twinkleton, 
repeating the word with a charming grace; 'but I will not withdraw, 
since you are so obliging.  If I wheel my desk to this corner 
window, shall I be in the way?'

'Madam!  In the way!'

'You are very kind. - Rosa, my dear, you will be under no 
restraint, I am sure.'

Here Mr. Grewgious, left by the fire with Rosa, said again:  'My 
dear, how do you do?  I am glad to see you, my dear.'  And having 
waited for her to sit down, sat down himself.

'My visits,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'are, like those of the angels - 
not that I compare myself to an angel.'

'No, sir,' said Rosa.

'Not by any means,' assented Mr. Grewgious.  'I merely refer to my 
visits, which are few and far between.  The angels are, we know 
very well, up-stairs.'

Miss Twinkleton looked round with a kind of stiff stare.

'I refer, my dear,' said Mr. Grewgious, laying his hand on Rosa's, 
as the possibility thrilled through his frame of his otherwise 
seeming to take the awful liberty of calling Miss Twinkleton my 
dear; 'I refer to the other young ladies.'

Miss Twinkleton resumed her writing.

Mr. Grewgious, with a sense of not having managed his opening point 
quite as neatly as he might have desired, smoothed his head from 
back to front as if he had just dived, and were pressing the water 
out - this smoothing action, however superfluous, was habitual with 
him - and took a pocket-book from his coat-pocket, and a stump of 
black-lead pencil from his waistcoat-pocket.

'I made,' he said, turning the leaves:  'I made a guiding 
memorandum or so - as I usually do, for I have no conversational 
powers whatever - to which I will, with your permission, my dear, 
refer.  "Well and happy."  Truly.  You are well and happy, my dear?  
You look so.'

'Yes, indeed, sir,' answered Rosa.

'For which,' said Mr. Grewgious, with a bend of his head towards 
the corner window, 'our warmest acknowledgments are due, and I am 
sure are rendered, to the maternal kindness and the constant care 
and consideration of the lady whom I have now the honour to see 
before me.'

This point, again, made but a lame departure from Mr. Grewgious, 
and never got to its destination; for, Miss Twinkleton, feeling 
that the courtesies required her to be by this time quite outside 
the conversation, was biting the end of her pen, and looking 
upward, as waiting for the descent of an idea from any member of 
the Celestial Nine who might have one to spare.

Mr. Grewgious smoothed his smooth head again, and then made another 
reference to his pocket-book; lining out 'well and happy,' as 
disposed of.

'"Pounds, shillings, and pence," is my next note.  A dry subject 
for a young lady, but an important subject too.  Life is pounds, 
shillings, and pence.  Death is - '  A sudden recollection of the 
death of her two parents seemed to stop him, and he said in a 
softer tone, and evidently inserting the negative as an after-
thought:  'Death is NOT pounds, shillings, and pence.'

His voice was as hard and dry as himself, and Fancy might have 
ground it straight, like himself, into high-dried snuff.  And yet, 
through the very limited means of expression that he possessed, he 
seemed to express kindness.  If Nature had but finished him off, 
kindness might have been recognisable in his face at this moment.  
But if the notches in his forehead wouldn't fuse together, and if 
his face would work and couldn't play, what could he do, poor man!

'"Pounds, shillings, and pence."  You find your allowance always 
sufficient for your wants, my dear?'

Rosa wanted for nothing, and therefore it was ample.

'And you are not in debt?'

Rosa laughed at the idea of being in debt.  It seemed, to her 
inexperience, a comical vagary of the imagination.  Mr. Grewgious 
stretched his near sight to be sure that this was her view of the 
case.  'Ah!' he said, as comment, with a furtive glance towards 
Miss Twinkleton, and lining out pounds, shillings, and pence:  'I 
spoke of having got among the angels!  So I did!'

Rosa felt what his next memorandum would prove to be, and was 
blushing and folding a crease in her dress with one embarrassed 
hand, long before he found it.

'"Marriage."  Hem!'  Mr. Grewgious carried his smoothing hand down 
over his eyes and nose, and even chin, before drawing his chair a 
little nearer, and speaking a little more confidentially:  'I now 
touch, my dear, upon the point that is the direct cause of my 
troubling you with the present visit.  Othenwise, being a 
particularly Angular man, I should not have intruded here.  I am 
the last man to intrude into a sphere for which I am so entirely 
unfitted.  I feel, on these premises, as if I was a bear - with the 
cramp - in a youthful Cotillon.'

His ungainliness gave him enough of the air of his simile to set 
Rosa off laughing heartily.

'It strikes you in the same light,' said Mr. Grewgious, with 
perfect calmness.  'Just so.  To return to my memorandum.  Mr. 
Edwin has been to and fro here, as was arranged.  You have 
mentioned that, in your quarterly letters to me.  And you like him, 
and he likes you.'

'I LIKE him very much, sir,' rejoined Rosa.

'So I said, my dear,' returned her guardian, for whose ear the 
timid emphasis was much too fine.  'Good.  And you correspond.'

'We write to one another,' said Rosa, pouting, as she recalled 
their epistolary differences.

'Such is the meaning that I attach to the word "correspond" in this 
application, my dear,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'Good.  All goes well, 
time works on, and at this next Christmas-time it will become 
necessary, as a matter of form, to give the exemplary lady in the 
corner window, to whom we are so much indebted, business notice of 
your departure in the ensuing half-year.  Your relations with her 
are far more than business relations, no doubt; but a residue of 
business remains in them, and business is business ever.  I am a 
particularly Angular man,' proceeded Mr. Grewgious, as if it 
suddenly occurred to him to mention it, 'and I am not used to give 
anything away.  If, for these two reasons, some competent Proxy 
would give YOU away, I should take it very kindly.'

Rosa intimated, with her eyes on the ground, that she thought a 
substitute might be found, if required.

'Surely, surely,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'For instance, the gentleman 
who teaches Dancing here - he would know how to do it with graceful 
propriety.  He would advance and retire in a manner satisfactory to 
the feelings of the officiating clergyman, and of yourself, and the 
bridegroom, and all parties concerned.  I am - I am a particularly 
Angular man,' said Mr. Grewgious, as if he had made up his mind to 
screw it out at last:  'and should only blunder.'

Rosa sat still and silent.  Perhaps her mind had not got quite so 
far as the ceremony yet, but was lagging on the way there.

'Memorandum, "Will."  Now, my dear,' said Mr. Grewgious, referring 
to his notes, disposing of 'Marriage' with his pencil, and taking a 
paper from his pocket; 'although.  I have before possessed you with 
the contents of your father's will, I think it right at this time 
to leave a certified copy of it in your hands.  And although Mr. 
Edwin is also aware of its contents, I think it right at this time 
likewise to place a certified copy of it in Mr. Jasper's hand - '

'Not in his own!' asked Rosa, looking up quickly.  'Cannot the copy 
go to Eddy himself?'

'Why, yes, my dear, if you particularly wish it; but I spoke of Mr. 
Jasper as being his trustee.'

'I do particularly wish it, if you please,' said Rosa, hurriedly 
and earnestly; 'I don't like Mr. Jasper to come between us, in any 
way.'

'It is natural, I suppose,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'that your young 
husband should be all in all.  Yes.  You observe that I say, I 
suppose.  The fact is, I am a particularly Unnatural man, and I 
don't know from my own knowledge.'

Rosa looked at him with some wonder.

'I mean,' he explained, 'that young ways were never my ways.  I was 
the only offspring of parents far advanced in life, and I half 
believe I was born advanced in life myself.  No personality is 
intended towards the name you will so soon change, when I remark 
that while the general growth of people seem to have come into 
existence, buds, I seem to have come into existence a chip.  I was 
a chip - and a very dry one - when I first became aware of myself.  
Respecting the other certified copy, your wish shall be complied 
with.  Respecting your inheritance, I think you know all.  It is an 
annuity of two hundred and fifty pounds.  The savings upon that 
annuity, and some other items to your credit, all duly carried to 
account, with vouchers, will place you in possession of a lump-sum 
of money, rather exceeding Seventeen Hundred Pounds.  I am 
empowered to advance the cost of your preparations for your 
marriage out of that fund.  All is told.'

'Will you please tell me,' said Rosa, taking the paper with a 
prettily knitted brow, but not opening it:  'whether I am right in 
what I am going to say?  I can understand what you tell me, so very 
much better than what I read in law-writings.  My poor papa and 
Eddy's father made their agreement together, as very dear and firm 
and fast friends, in order that we, too, might be very dear and 
firm and fast friends after them?'

'Just so.'

'For the lasting good of both of us, and the lasting happiness of 
both of us?'

'Just so.'

'That we might be to one another even much more than they had been 
to one another?'

'Just so.'

'It was not bound upon Eddy, and it was not bound upon me, by any 
forfeit, in case - '

'Don't be agitated, my dear.  In the case that it brings tears into 
your affectionate eyes even to picture to yourself - in the case of 
your not marrying one another - no, no forfeiture on either side.  
You would then have been my ward until you were of age.  No worse 
would have befallen you.  Bad enough perhaps!'

'And Eddy?'

'He would have come into his partnership derived from his father, 
and into its arrears to his credit (if any), on attaining his 
majority, just as now.'

Rosa, with her perplexed face and knitted brow, bit the corner of 
her attested copy, as she sat with her head on one side, looking 
abstractedly on the floor, and smoothing it with her foot.

'In short,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'this betrothal is a wish, a 
sentiment, a friendly project, tenderly expressed on both sides.  
That it was strongly felt, and that there was a lively hope that it 
would prosper, there can be no doubt.  When you were both children, 
you began to be accustomed to it, and it HAS prospered.  But 
circumstances alter cases; and I made this visit to-day, partly, 
indeed principally, to discharge myself of the duty of telling you, 
my dear, that two young people can only be betrothed in marriage 
(except as a matter of convenience, and therefore mockery and 
misery) of their own free will, their own attachment, and their own 
assurance (it may or it may not prove a mistaken one, but we must 
take our chance of that), that they are suited to each other, and 
will make each other happy.  Is it to be supposed, for example, 
that if either of your fathers were living now, and had any 
mistrust on that subject, his mind would not be changed by the 
change of circumstances involved in the change of your years?  
Untenable, unreasonable, inconclusive, and preposterous!'

Mr. Grewgious said all this, as if he were reading it aloud; or, 
still more, as if he were repeating a lesson.  So expressionless of 
any approach to spontaneity were his face and manner.

'I have now, my dear,' he added, blurring out 'Will' with his 
pencil, 'discharged myself of what is doubtless a formal duty in 
this case, but still a duty in such a case.  Memorandum, "Wishes."  
My dear, is there any wish of yours that I can further?'

Rosa shook her head, with an almost plaintive air of hesitation in 
want of help.

'Is there any instruction that I can take from you with reference 
to your affairs?'

'I - I should like to settle them with Eddy first, if you please,' 
said Rosa, plaiting the crease in her dress.

'Surely, surely,' returned Mr. Grewgious.  'You two should be of 
one mind in all things.  Is the young gentleman expected shortly?'

'He has gone away only this morning.  He will be back at 
Christmas.'

'Nothing could happen better.  You will, on his return at 
Christmas, arrange all matters of detail with him; you will then 
communicate with me; and I will discharge myself (as a mere 
business acquaintance) of my business responsibilities towards the 
accomplished lady in the corner window.  They will accrue at that 
season.'  Blurring pencil once again.  'Memorandum, "Leave."  Yes.  
I will now, my dear, take my leave.'

'Could I,' said Rosa, rising, as he jerked out of his chair in his 
ungainly way:  'could I ask you, most kindly to come to me at 
Christmas, if I had anything particular to say to you?'

'Why, certainly, certainly,' he rejoined; apparently - if such a 
word can be used of one who had no apparent lights or shadows about 
him - complimented by the question.  'As a particularly Angular 
man, I do not fit smoothly into the social circle, and consequently 
I have no other engagement at Christmas-time than to partake, on 
the twenty-fifth, of a boiled turkey and celery sauce with a - with 
a particularly Angular clerk I have the good fortune to possess, 
whose father, being a Norfolk farmer, sends him up (the turkey up), 
as a present to me, from the neighbourhood of Norwich.  I should be 
quite proud of your wishing to see me, my dear.  As a professional 
Receiver of rents, so very few people DO wish to see me, that the 
novelty would be bracing.'

For his ready acquiescence, the grateful Rosa put her hands upon 
his shoulders, stood on tiptoe, and instantly kissed him.

'Lord bless me!' cried Mr. Grewgious.  'Thank you, my dear!  The 
honour is almost equal to the pleasure.  Miss Twinkleton, madam, I 
have had a most satisfactory conversation with my ward, and I will 
now release you from the incumbrance of my presence.'

'Nay, sir,' rejoined Miss Twinkleton, rising with a gracious 
condescension:  'say not incumbrance.  Not so, by any means.  I 
cannot permit you to say so.'

'Thank you, madam.  I have read in the newspapers,' said Mr. 
Grewgious, stammering a little, 'that when a distinguished visitor 
(not that I am one:  far from it) goes to a school (not that this 
is one:  far from it), he asks for a holiday, or some sort of 
grace.  It being now the afternoon in the - College - of which you 
are the eminent head, the young ladies might gain nothing, except 
in name, by having the rest of the day allowed them.  But if there 
is any young lady at all under a cloud, might I solicit - '

'Ah, Mr. Grewgious, Mr. Grewgious!' cried Miss Twinkleton, with a 
chastely-rallying forefinger.  'O you gentlemen, you gentlemen!  
Fie for shame, that you are so hard upon us poor maligned 
disciplinarians of our sex, for your sakes!  But as Miss Ferdinand 
is at present weighed down by an incubus' - Miss Twinkleton might 
have said a pen-and-ink-ubus of writing out Monsieur La Fontaine - 
'go to her, Rosa my dear, and tell her the penalty is remitted, in 
deference to the intercession of your guardian, Mr. Grewgious.'

Miss Twinkleton here achieved a curtsey, suggestive of marvels 
happening to her respected legs, and which she came out of nobly, 
three yards behind her starting-point.

As he held it incumbent upon him to call on Mr. Jasper before 
leaving Cloisterham, Mr. Grewgious went to the gatehouse, and 
climbed its postern stair.  But Mr. Jasper's door being closed, and 
presenting on a slip of paper the word 'Cathedral,' the fact of its 
being service-time was borne into the mind of Mr. Grewgious.  So he 
descended the stair again, and, crossing the Close, paused at the 
great western folding-door of the Cathedral, which stood open on 
the fine and bright, though short-lived, afternoon, for the airing 
of the place.

'Dear me,' said Mr. Grewgious, peeping in, 'it's like looking down 
the throat of Old Time.'

Old Time heaved a mouldy sigh from tomb and arch and vault; and 
gloomy shadows began to deepen in corners; and damps began to rise 
from green patches of stone; and jewels, cast upon the pavement of 
the nave from stained glass by the declining sun, began to perish.  
Within the grill-gate of the chancel, up the steps surmounted 
loomingly by the fast-darkening organ, white robes could be dimly 
seen, and one feeble voice, rising and falling in a cracked, 
monotonous mutter, could at intervals be faintly heard.  In the 
free outer air, the river, the green pastures, and the brown arable 
lands, the teeming hills and dales, were reddened by the sunset:  
while the distant little windows in windmills and farm homesteads, 
shone, patches of bright beaten gold.  In the Cathedral, all became 
gray, murky, and sepulchral, and the cracked monotonous mutter went 
on like a dying voice, until the organ and the choir burst forth, 
and drowned it in a sea of music.  Then, the sea fell, and the 
dying voice made another feeble effort, and then the sea rose high, 
and beat its life out, and lashed the roof, and surged among the 
arches, and pierced the heights of the great tower; and then the 
sea was dry, and all was still.

Mr. Grewgious had by that time walked to the chancel-steps, where 
he met the living waters coming out.

'Nothing is the matter?'  Thus Jasper accosted him, rather quickly.  
'You have not been sent for?'

'Not at all, not at all.  I came down of my own accord.  I have 
been to my pretty ward's, and am now homeward bound again.'

'You found her thriving?'

'Blooming indeed.  Most blooming.  I merely came to tell her, 
seriously, what a betrothal by deceased parents is.'

'And what is it - according to your judgment?'

Mr. Grewgious noticed the whiteness of the lips that asked the 
question, and put it down to the chilling account of the Cathedral.

'I merely came to tell her that it could not be considered binding, 
against any such reason for its dissolution as a want of affection, 
or want of disposition to carry it into effect, on the side of 
either party.'

'May I ask, had you any especial reason for telling her that?'

Mr. Grewgious answered somewhat sharply:  'The especial reason of 
doing my duty, sir.  Simply that.'  Then he added:  'Come, Mr. 
Jasper; I know your affection for your nephew, and that you are 
quick to feel on his behalf.  I assure you that this implies not 
the least doubt of, or disrespect to, your nephew.'

'You could not,' returned Jasper, with a friendly pressure of his 
arm, as they walked on side by side, 'speak more handsomely.'

Mr. Grewgious pulled off his hat to smooth his head, and, having 
smoothed it, nodded it contentedly, and put his hat on again.

'I will wager,' said Jasper, smiling - his lips were still so white 
that he was conscious of it, and bit and moistened them while 
speaking:  'I will wager that she hinted no wish to be released 
from Ned.'

'And you will win your wager, if you do,' retorted Mr. Grewgious.  
'We should allow some margin for little maidenly delicacies in a 
young motherless creature, under such circumstances, I suppose; it 
is not in my line; what do you think?'

'There can be no doubt of it.'

'I am glad you say so.  Because,' proceeded Mr. Grewgious, who had 
all this time very knowingly felt his way round to action on his 
remembrance of what she had said of Jasper himself:  'because she 
seems to have some little delicate instinct that all preliminary 
arrangements had best be made between Mr. Edwin Drood and herself, 
don't you see?  She don't want us, don't you know?'

Jasper touched himself on the breast, and said, somewhat 
indistinctly:  'You mean me.'

Mr. Grewgious touched himself on the breast, and said:  'I mean us.  
Therefore, let them have their little discussions and councils 
together, when Mr. Edwin Drood comes back here at Christmas; and 
then you and I will step in, and put the final touches to the 
business.'

'So, you settled with her that you would come back at Christmas?' 
observed Jasper.  'I see!  Mr. Grewgious, as you quite fairly said 
just now, there is such an exceptional attachment between my nephew 
and me, that I am more sensitive for the dear, fortunate, happy, 
happy fellow than for myself.  But it is only right that the young 
lady should be considered, as you have pointed out, and that I 
should accept my cue from you.  I accept it.  I understand that at 
Christmas they will complete their preparations for May, and that 
their marriage will be put in final train by themselves, and that 
nothing will remain for us but to put ourselves in train also, and 
have everything ready for our formal release from our trusts, on 
Edwin's birthday.'

'That is my understanding,' assented Mr. Grewgious, as they shook 
hands to part.  'God bless them both!'

'God save them both!' cried Jasper.

'I said, bless them,' remarked the former, looking back over his 
shoulder.

'I said, save them,' returned the latter.  'Is there any 
difference?'

CHAPTER X - SMOOTHING THE WAY

IT has been often enough remarked that women have a curious power 
of divining the characters of men, which would seem to be innate 
and instinctive; seeing that it is arrived at through no patient 
process of reasoning, that it can give no satisfactory or 
sufficient account of itself, and that it pronounces in the most 
confident manner even against accumulated observation on the part 
of the other sex.  But it has not been quite so often remarked that 
this power (fallible, like every other human attribute) is for the 
most part absolutely incapable of self-revision; and that when it 
has delivered an adverse opinion which by all human lights is 
subsequently proved to have failed, it is undistinguishable from 
prejudice, in respect of its determination not to be corrected.  
Nay, the very possibility of contradiction or disproof, however 
remote, communicates to this feminine judgment from the first, in 
nine cases out of ten, the weakness attendant on the testimony of 
an interested witness; so personally and strongly does the fair 
diviner connect herself with her divination.

'Now, don't you think, Ma dear,' said the Minor Canon to his mother 
one day as she sat at her knitting in his little book-room, 'that 
you are rather hard on Mr. Neville?'

'No, I do NOT, Sept,' returned the old lady.

'Let us discuss it, Ma.'

'I have no objection to discuss it, Sept.  I trust, my dear, I am 
always open to discussion.'  There was a vibration in the old 
lady's cap, as though she internally added:  'and I should like to 
see the discussion that would change MY mind!'

'Very good, Ma,' said her conciliatory son.  'There is nothing like 
being open to discussion.'

'I hope not, my dear,' returned the old lady, evidently shut to it.

'Well!  Mr. Neville, on that unfortunate occasion, commits himself 
under provocation.'

'And under mulled wine,' added the old lady.

'I must admit the wine.  Though I believe the two young men were 
much alike in that regard.'

'I don't,' said the old lady.

'Why not, Ma?'

'Because I DON'T,' said the old lady.  'Still, I am quite open to 
discussion.'

'But, my dear Ma, I cannot see how we are to discuss, if you take 
that line.'

'Blame Mr. Neville for it, Sept, and not me,' said the old lady, 
with stately severity.

'My dear Ma! why Mr. Neville?'

'Because,' said Mrs. Crisparkle, retiring on first principles, 'he 
came home intoxicated, and did great discredit to this house, and 
showed great disrespect to this family.'

'That is not to be denied, Ma.  He was then, and he is now, very 
sorry for it.'

'But for Mr. Jasper's well-bred consideration in coming up to me, 
next day, after service, in the Nave itself, with his gown still 
on, and expressing his hope that I had not been greatly alarmed or 
had my rest violently broken, I believe I might never have heard of 
that disgraceful transaction,' said the old lady.

'To be candid, Ma, I think I should have kept it from you if I 
could:  though I had not decidedly made up my mind.  I was 
following Jasper out, to confer with him on the subject, and to 
consider the expediency of his and my jointly hushing the thing up 
on all accounts, when I found him speaking to you.  Then it was too 
late.'

'Too late, indeed, Sept.  He was still as pale as gentlemanly ashes 
at what had taken place in his rooms overnight.'

'If I HAD kept it from you, Ma, you may be sure it would have been 
for your peace and quiet, and for the good of the young men, and in 
my best discharge of my duty according to my lights.'

The old lady immediately walked across the room and kissed him:  
saying, 'Of course, my dear Sept, I am sure of that.'

'However, it became the town-talk,' said Mr. Crisparkle, rubbing 
his ear, as his mother resumed her seat, and her knitting, 'and 
passed out of my power.'

'And I said then, Sept,' returned the old lady, 'that I thought ill 
of Mr. Neville.  And I say now, that I think ill of Mr. Neville.  
And I said then, and I say now, that I hope Mr. Neville may come to 
good, but I don't believe he will.'  Here the cap vibrated again 
considerably.

'I am sorry to hear you say so, Ma - '

'I am sorry to say so, my dear,' interposed the old lady, knitting 
on firmly, 'but I can't help it.'

' - For,' pursued the Minor Canon, 'it is undeniable that Mr. 
Neville is exceedingly industrious and attentive, and that he 
improves apace, and that he has - I hope I may say - an attachment 
to me.'

'There is no merit in the last article, my dear,' said the old 
lady, quickly; 'and if he says there is, I think the worse of him 
for the boast.'

'But, my dear Ma, he never said there was.'

'Perhaps not,' returned the old lady; 'still, I don't see that it 
greatly signifies.'

There was no impatience in the pleasant look with which Mr. 
Crisparkle contemplated the pretty old piece of china as it 
knitted; but there was, certainly, a humorous sense of its not 
being a piece of china to argue with very closely.

'Besides, Sept, ask yourself what he would be without his sister.  
You know what an influence she has over him; you know what a 
capacity she has; you know that whatever he reads with you, he 
reads with her.  Give her her fair share of your praise, and how 
much do you leave for him?'

At these words Mr. Crisparkle fell into a little reverie, in which 
he thought of several things.  He thought of the times he had seen 
the brother and sister together in deep converse over one of his 
own old college books; now, in the rimy mornings, when he made 
those sharpening pilgrimages to Cloisterham Weir; now, in the 
sombre evenings, when he faced the wind at sunset, having climbed 
his favourite outlook, a beetling fragment of monastery ruin; and 
the two studious figures passed below him along the margin of the 
river, in which the town fires and lights already shone, making the 
landscape bleaker.  He thought how the consciousness had stolen 
upon him that in teaching one, he was teaching two; and how he had 
almost insensibly adapted his explanations to both minds - that 
with which his own was daily in contact, and that which he only 
approached through it.  He thought of the gossip that had reached 
him from the Nuns' House, to the effect that Helena, whom he had 
mistrusted as so proud and fierce, submitted herself to the fairy-
bride (as he called her), and learnt from her what she knew.  He 
thought of the picturesque alliance between those two, externally 
so very different.  He thought - perhaps most of all - could it be 
that these things were yet but so many weeks old, and had become an 
integral part of his life?

As, whenever the Reverend Septimus fell a-musing, his good mother 
took it to be an infallible sign that he 'wanted support,' the 
blooming old lady made all haste to the dining-room closet, to 
produce from it the support embodied in a glass of Constantia and a 
home-made biscuit.  It was a most wonderful closet, worthy of 
Cloisterham and of Minor Canon Corner.  Above it, a portrait of 
Handel in a flowing wig beamed down at the spectator, with a 
knowing air of being up to the contents of the closet, and a 
musical air of intending to combine all its harmonies in one 
delicious fugue.  No common closet with a vulgar door on hinges, 
openable all at once, and leaving nothing to be disclosed by 
degrees, this rare closet had a lock in mid-air, where two 
perpendicular slides met; the one falling down, and the other 
pushing up.  The upper slide, on being pulled down (leaving the 
lower a double mystery), revealed deep shelves of pickle-jars, jam-
pots, tin canisters, spice-boxes, and agreeably outlandish vessels 
of blue and white, the luscious lodgings of preserved tamarinds and 
ginger.  Every benevolent inhabitant of this retreat had his name 
inscribed upon his stomach.  The pickles, in a uniform of rich 
brown double-breasted buttoned coat, and yellow or sombre drab 
continuations, announced their portly forms, in printed capitals, 
as Walnut, Gherkin, Onion, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Mixed, and other 
members of that noble family.  The jams, as being of a less 
masculine temperament, and as wearing curlpapers, announced 
themselves in feminine caligraphy, like a soft whisper, to be 
Raspberry, Gooseberry, Apricot, Plum, Damson, Apple, and Peach.  
The scene closing on these charmers, and the lower slide ascending, 
oranges were revealed, attended by a mighty japanned sugar-box, to 
temper their acerbity if unripe.  Home-made biscuits waited at the 
Court of these Powers, accompanied by a goodly fragment of plum-
cake, and various slender ladies' fingers, to be dipped into sweet 
wine and kissed.  Lowest of all, a compact leaden-vault enshrined 
the sweet wine and a stock of cordials:  whence issued whispers of 
Seville Orange, Lemon, Almond, and Caraway-seed.  There was a 
crowning air upon this closet of closets, of having been for ages 
hummed through by the Cathedral bell and organ, until those 
venerable bees had made sublimated honey of everything in store; 
and it was always observed that every dipper among the shelves 
(deep, as has been noticed, and swallowing up head, shoulders, and 
elbows) came forth again mellow-faced, and seeming to have 
undergone a saccharine transfiguration.

The Reverend Septimus yielded himself up quite as willing a victim 
to a nauseous medicinal herb-closet, also presided over by the 
china shepherdess, as to this glorious cupboard.  To what amazing 
infusions of gentian, peppermint, gilliflower, sage, parsley, 
thyme, rue, rosemary, and dandelion, did his courageous stomach 
submit itself!  In what wonderful wrappers, enclosing layers of 
dried leaves, would he swathe his rosy and contented face, if his 
mother suspected him of a toothache!  What botanical blotches would 
he cheerfully stick upon his cheek, or forehead, if the dear old 
lady convicted him of an imperceptible pimple there!  Into this 
herbaceous penitentiary, situated on an upper staircase-landing:  a 
low and narrow whitewashed cell, where bunches of dried leaves hung 
from rusty hooks in the ceiling, and were spread out upon shelves, 
in company with portentous bottles:  would the Reverend Septimus 
submissively be led, like the highly popular lamb who has so long 
and unresistingly been led to the slaughter, and there would he, 
unlike that lamb, bore nobody but himself.  Not even doing that 
much, so that the old lady were busy and pleased, he would quietly 
swallow what was given him, merely taking a corrective dip of hands 
and face into the great bowl of dried rose-leaves, and into the 
other great bowl of dried lavender, and then would go out, as 
confident in the sweetening powers of Cloisterham Weir and a 
wholesome mind, as Lady Macbeth was hopeless of those of all the 
seas that roll.

In the present instance the good Minor Canon took his glass of 
Constantia with an excellent grace, and, so supported to his 
mother's satisfaction, applied himself to the remaining duties of 
the day.  In their orderly and punctual progress they brought round 
Vesper Service and twilight.  The Cathedral being very cold, he set 
off for a brisk trot after service; the trot to end in a charge at 
his favourite fragment of ruin, which was to be carried by storm, 
without a pause for breath.

He carried it in a masterly manner, and, not breathed even then, 
stood looking down upon the river.  The river at Cloisterham is 
sufficiently near the sea to throw up oftentimes a quantity of 
seaweed.  An unusual quantity had come in with the last tide, and 
this, and the confusion of the water, and the restless dipping and 
flapping of the noisy gulls, and an angry light out seaward beyond 
the brown-sailed barges that were turning black, foreshadowed a 
stormy night.  In his mind he was contrasting the wild and noisy 
sea with the quiet harbour of Minor Canon Corner, when Helena and 
Neville Landless passed below him.  He had had the two together in 
his thoughts all day, and at once climbed down to speak to them 
together.  The footing was rough in an uncertain light for any 
tread save that of a good climber; but the Minor Canon was as good 
a climber as most men, and stood beside them before many good 
climbers would have been half-way down.

'A wild evening, Miss Landless!  Do you not find your usual walk 
with your brother too exposed and cold for the time of year?  Or at 
all events, when the sun is down, and the weather is driving in 
from the sea?'

Helena thought not.  It was their favourite walk.  It was very 
retired.

'It is very retired,' assented Mr. Crisparkle, laying hold of his 
opportunity straightway, and walking on with them.  'It is a place 
of all others where one can speak without interruption, as I wish 
to do.  Mr. Neville, I believe you tell your sister everything that 
passes between us?'

'Everything, sir.'

'Consequently,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'your sister is aware that I 
have repeatedly urged you to make some kind of apology for that 
unfortunate occurrence which befell on the night of your arrival 
here.'  In saying it he looked to her, and not to him; therefore it 
was she, and not he, who replied:

'Yes.'

'I call it unfortunate, Miss Helena,' resumed Mr. Crisparkle, 
'forasmuch as it certainly has engendered a prejudice against 
Neville.  There is a notion about, that he is a dangerously 
passionate fellow, of an uncontrollable and furious temper:  he is 
really avoided as such.'

'I have no doubt he is, poor fellow,' said Helena, with a look of 
proud compassion at her brother, expressing a deep sense of his 
being ungenerously treated.  'I should be quite sure of it, from 
your saying so; but what you tell me is confirmed by suppressed 
hints and references that I meet with every day.'

'Now,' Mr. Crisparkle again resumed, in a tone of mild though firm 
persuasion, 'is not this to be regretted, and ought it not to be 
amended?  These are early days of Neville's in Cloisterham, and I 
have no fear of his outliving such a prejudice, and proving himself 
to have been misunderstood.  But how much wiser to take action at 
once, than to trust to uncertain time!  Besides, apart from its 
being politic, it is right.  For there can be no question that 
Neville was wrong.'

'He was provoked,' Helena submitted.

'He was the assailant,' Mr. Crisparkle submitted.

They walked on in silence, until Helena raised her eyes to the 
Minor Canon's face, and said, almost reproachfully:  'O Mr. 
Crisparkle, would you have Neville throw himself at young Drood's 
feet, or at Mr. Jasper's, who maligns him every day?  In your heart 
you cannot mean it.  From your heart you could not do it, if his 
case were yours.'

'I have represented to Mr. Crisparkle, Helena,' said Neville, with 
a glance of deference towards his tutor, 'that if I could do it 
from my heart, I would.  But I cannot, and I revolt from the 
pretence.  You forget however, that to put the case to Mr. 
Crisparkle as his own, is to  suppose to have done what I did.'

'I ask his pardon,' said Helena.

'You see,' remarked Mr. Crisparkle, again laying hold of his 
opportunity, though with a moderate and delicate touch, 'you both 
instinctively acknowledge that Neville did wrong.  Then why stop 
short, and not otherwise acknowledge it?'

'Is there no difference,' asked Helena, with a little faltering in 
her manner; 'between submission to a generous spirit, and 
submission to a base or trivial one?'

Before the worthy Minor Canon was quite ready with his argument in 
reference to this nice distinction, Neville struck in:

'Help me to clear myself with Mr. Crisparkle, Helena.  Help me to 
convince him that I cannot be the first to make concessions without 
mockery and falsehood.  My nature must be changed before I can do 
so, and it is not changed.  I am sensible of inexpressible affront, 
and deliberate aggravation of inexpressible affront, and I am 
angry.  The plain truth is, I am still as angry when I recall that 
night as I was that night.'

'Neville,' hinted the Minor Canon, with a steady countenance, 'you 
have repeated that former action of your hands, which I so much 
dislike.'

'I am sorry for it, sir, but it was involuntary.  I confessed that 
I was still as angry.'

'And I confess,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'that I hoped for better 
things.'

'I am sorry to disappoint you, sir, but it would be far worse to 
deceive you, and I should deceive you grossly if I pretended that 
you had softened me in this respect.  The time may come when your 
powerful influence will do even that with the difficult pupil whose 
antecedents you know; but it has not come yet.  Is this so, and in 
spite of my struggles against myself, Helena?'

She, whose dark eyes were watching the effect of what he said on 
Mr. Crisparkle's face, replied - to Mr. Crisparkle, not to him:  
'It is so.'  After a short pause, she answered the slightest look 
of inquiry conceivable, in her brother's eyes, with as slight an 
affirmative bend of her own head; and he went on:

'I have never yet had the courage to say to you, sir, what in full 
openness I ought to have said when you first talked with me on this 
subject.  It is not easy to say, and I have been withheld by a fear 
of its seeming ridiculous, which is very strong upon me down to 
this last moment, and might, but for my sister, prevent my being 
quite open with you even now. - I admire Miss Bud, sir, so very 
much, that I cannot bear her being treated with conceit or 
indifference; and even if I did not feel that I had an injury 
against young Drood on my own account, I should feel that I had an 
injury against him on hers.'

Mr. Crisparkle, in utter amazement, looked at Helena for 
corroboration, and met in her expressive face full corroboration, 
and a plea for advice.

'The young lady of whom you speak is, as you know, Mr. Neville, 
shortly to be married,' said Mr. Crisparkle, gravely; 'therefore 
your admiration, if it be of that special nature which you seem to 
indicate, is outrageously misplaced.  Moreover, it is monstrous 
that you should take upon yourself to be the young lady's champion 
against her chosen husband.  Besides, you have seen them only once.  
The young lady has become your sister's friend; and I wonder that 
your sister, even on her behalf, has not checked you in this 
irrational and culpable fancy.'

'She has tried, sir, but uselessly.  Husband or no husband, that 
fellow is incapable of the feeling with which I am inspired towards 
the beautiful young creature whom he treats like a doll.  I say he 
is as incapable of it, as he is unworthy of her.  I say she is 
sacrificed in being bestowed upon him.  I say that I love her, and 
despise and hate him!'  This with a face so flushed, and a gesture 
so violent, that his sister crossed to his side, and caught his 
arm, remonstrating, 'Neville, Neville!'

Thus recalled to himself, he quickly became sensible of having lost 
the guard he had set upon his passionate tendency, and covered his 
face with his hand, as one repentant and wretched.

Mr. Crisparkle, watching him attentively, and at the same time 
meditating how to proceed, walked on for some paces in silence.  
Then he spoke:

'Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville, I am sorely grieved to see in you more 
traces of a character as sullen, angry, and wild, as the night now 
closing in.  They are of too serious an aspect to leave me the 
resource of treating the infatuation you have disclosed, as 
undeserving serious consideration.  I give it very serious 
consideration, and I speak to you accordingly.  This feud between 
you and young Drood must not go on.  I cannot permit it to go on 
any longer, knowing what I now know from you, and you living under 
my roof.  Whatever prejudiced and unauthorised constructions your 
blind and envious wrath may put upon his character, it is a frank, 
good-natured character.  I know I can trust to it for that.  Now, 
pray observe what I am about to say.  On reflection, and on your 
sister's representation, I am willing to admit that, in making 
peace with young Drood, you have a right to be met half-way.  I 
will engage that you shall be, and even that young Drood shall make 
the first advance.  This condition fulfilled, you will pledge me 
the honour of a Christian gentleman that the quarrel is for ever at 
an end on your side.  What may be in your heart when you give him 
your hand, can only be known to the Searcher of all hearts; but it 
will never go well with you, if there be any treachery there.  So 
far, as to that; next as to what I must again speak of as your 
infatuation.  I understand it to have been confided to me, and to 
be known to no other person save your sister and yourself.  Do I 
understand aright?'

Helena answered in a low voice:  'It is only known to us three who 
are here together.'

'It is not at all known to the young lady, your friend?'

'On my soul, no!'

'I require you, then, to give me your similar and solemn pledge, 
Mr. Neville, that it shall remain the secret it is, and that you 
will take no other action whatsoever upon it than endeavouring (and 
that most earnestly) to erase it from your mind.  I will not tell 
you that it will soon pass; I will not tell you that it is the 
fancy of the moment; I will not tell you that such caprices have 
their rise and fall among the young and ardent every hour; I will 
leave you undisturbed in the belief that it has few parallels or 
none, that it will abide with you a long time, and that it will be 
very difficult to conquer.  So much the more weight shall I attach 
to the pledge I require from you, when it is unreservedly given.'

The young man twice or thrice essayed to speak, but failed.

'Let me leave you with your sister, whom it is time you took home,' 
said Mr. Crisparkle.  'You will find me alone in my room by-and-
by.'

'Pray do not leave us yet,' Helena implored him.  'Another minute.'

'I should not,' said Neville, pressing his hand upon his face, 
'have needed so much as another minute, if you had been less 
patient with me, Mr. Crisparkle, less considerate of me, and less 
unpretendingly good and true.  O, if in my childhood I had known 
such a guide!'

'Follow your guide now, Neville,' murmured Helena, 'and follow him 
to Heaven!'

There was that in her tone which broke the good Minor Canon's 
voice, or it would have repudiated her exaltation of him.  As it 
was, he laid a finger on his lips, and looked towards her brother.

'To say that I give both pledges, Mr. Crisparkle, out of my 
innermost heart, and to say that there is no treachery in it, is to 
say nothing!'  Thus Neville, greatly moved.  'I beg your 
forgiveness for my miserable lapse into a burst of passion.'

'Not mine, Neville, not mine.  You know with whom forgiveness lies, 
as the highest attribute conceivable.  Miss Helena, you and your 
brother are twin children.  You came into this world with the same 
dispositions, and you passed your younger days together surrounded 
by the same adverse circumstances.  What you have overcome in 
yourself, can you not overcome in him?  You see the rock that lies 
in his course.  Who but you can keep him clear of it?'

'Who but you, sir?' replied Helena.  'What is my influence, or my 
weak wisdom, compared with yours!'

'You have the wisdom of Love,' returned the Minor Canon, 'and it 
was the highest wisdom ever known upon this earth, remember.  As to 
mine - but the less said of that commonplace commodity the better.  
Good night!'

She took the hand he offered her, and gratefully and almost 
reverently raised it to her lips.

'Tut!' said the Minor Canon softly, 'I am much overpaid!' and 
turned away.

Retracing his steps towards the Cathedral Close, he tried, as he 
went along in the dark, to think out the best means of bringing to 
pass what he had promised to effect, and what must somehow be done.  
'I shall probably be asked to marry them,' he reflected, 'and I 
would they were married and gone!  But this presses first.'

He debated principally whether he should write to young Drood, or 
whether he should speak to Jasper.  The consciousness of being 
popular with the whole Cathedral establishment inclined him to the 
latter course, and the well-timed sight of the lighted gatehouse 
decided him to take it.  'I will strike while the iron is hot,' he 
said, 'and see him now.'

Jasper was lying asleep on a couch before the fire, when, having 
ascended the postern-stair, and received no answer to his knock at 
the door, Mr. Crisparkle gently turned the handle and looked in.  
Long afterwards he had cause to remember how Jasper sprang from the 
couch in a delirious state between sleeping and waking, and crying 
out:  'What is the matter?  Who did it?'

'It is only I, Jasper.  I am sorry to have disturbed you.'

The glare of his eyes settled down into a look of recognition, and 
he moved a chair or two, to make a way to the fireside.

'I was dreaming at a great rate, and am glad to be disturbed from 
an indigestive after-dinner sleep.  Not to mention that you are 
always welcome.'

'Thank you.  I am not confident,' returned Mr. Crisparkle, as he 
sat himself down in the easy-chair placed for him, 'that my subject 
will at first sight be quite as welcome as myself; but I am a 
minister of peace, and I pursue my subject in the interests of 
peace.  In a word, Jasper, I want to establish peace between these 
two young fellows.'

A very perplexed expression took hold of Mr. Jasper's face; a very 
perplexing expression too, for Mr. Crisparkle could make nothing of 
it.

'How?' was Jasper's inquiry, in a low and slow voice, after a 
silence.

'For the "How" I come to you.  I want to ask you to do me the great 
favour and service of interposing with your nephew (I have already 
interposed with Mr. Neville), and getting him to write you a short 
note, in his lively way, saying that he is willing to shake hands.  
I know what a good-natured fellow he is, and what influence you 
have with him.  And without in the least defending Mr. Neville, we 
must all admit that he was bitterly stung.'

Jasper turned that perplexed face towards the fire.  Mr. Crisparkle 
continuing to observe it, found it even more perplexing than 
before, inasmuch as it seemed to denote (which could hardly be) 
some close internal calculation.

'I know that you are not prepossessed in Mr. Neville's favour,' the 
Minor Canon was going on, when Jasper stopped him:

'You have cause to say so.  I am not, indeed.'

'Undoubtedly; and I admit his lamentable violence of temper, though 
I hope he and I will get the better of it between us.  But I have 
exacted a very solemn promise from him as to his future demeanour 
towards your nephew, if you do kindly interpose; and I am sure he 
will keep it.'

'You are always responsible and trustworthy, Mr. Crisparkle.  Do 
you really feel sure that you can answer for him so confidently?'

'I do.'

The perplexed and perplexing look vanished.

'Then you relieve my mind of a great dread, and a heavy weight,' 
said Jasper; 'I will do it.'

Mr. Crisparkle, delighted by the swiftness and completeness of his 
success, acknowledged it in the handsomest terms.

'I will do it,' repeated Jasper, 'for the comfort of having your 
guarantee against my vague and unfounded fears.  You will laugh - 
but do you keep a Diary?'

'A line for a day; not more.'

'A line for a day would be quite as much as my uneventful life 
would need, Heaven knows,' said Jasper, taking a book from a desk, 
'but that my Diary is, in fact, a Diary of Ned's life too.  You 
will laugh at this entry; you will guess when it was made:

'"Past midnight. - After what I have just now seen, I have a morbid 
dread upon me of some horrible consequences resulting to my dear 
boy, that I cannot reason with or in any way contend against.  All 
my efforts are vain.  The demoniacal passion of this Neville 
Landless, his strength in his fury, and his savage rage for the 
destruction of its object, appal me.  So profound is the 
impression, that twice since I have gone into my dear boy's room, 
to assure myself of his sleeping safely, and not lying dead in his 
blood."

'Here is another entry next morning:

'"Ned up and away.  Light-hearted and unsuspicious as ever.  He 
laughed when I cautioned him, and said he was as good a man as 
Neville Landless any day.  I told him that might be, but he was not 
as bad a man.  He continued to make light of it, but I travelled 
with him as far as I could, and left him most unwillingly.  I am 
unable to shake off these dark intangible presentiments of evil - 
if feelings founded upon staring facts are to be so called."

'Again and again,' said Jasper, in conclusion, twirling the leaves 
of the book before putting it by, 'I have relapsed into these 
moods, as other entries show.  But I have now your assurance at my 
back, and shall put it in my book, and make it an antidote to my 
black humours.'

'Such an antidote, I hope,' returned Mr. Crisparkle, 'as will 
induce you before long to consign the black humours to the flames.  
I ought to be the last to find any fault with you this evening, 
when you have met my wishes so freely; but I must say, Jasper, that 
your devotion to your nephew has made you exaggerative here.'

'You are my witness,' said Jasper, shrugging his shoulders, 'what 
my state of mind honestly was, that night, before I sat down to 
write, and in what words I expressed it.  You remember objecting to 
a word I used, as being too strong?  It was a stronger word than 
any in my Diary.'

'Well, well.  Try the antidote,' rejoined Mr. Crisparkle; 'and may 
it give you a brighter and better view of the case!  We will 
discuss it no more now.  I have to thank you for myself, thank you 
sincerely.'

'You shall find,' said Jasper, as they shook hands, 'that I will 
not do the thing you wish me to do, by halves.  I will take care 
that Ned, giving way at all, shall give way thoroughly.'

On the third day after this conversation, he called on Mr. 
Crisparkle with the following letter:

'MY DEAR JACK,

'I am touched by your account of your interview with Mr. 
Crisparkle, whom I much respect and esteem.  At once I openly say 
that I forgot myself on that occasion quite as much as Mr. Landless 
did, and that I wish that bygone to be a bygone, and all to be 
right again.

'Look here, dear old boy.  Ask Mr. Landless to dinner on Christmas 
Eve (the better the day the better the deed), and let there be only 
we three, and let us shake hands all round there and then, and say 
no more about it.

'My dear Jack,
'Ever your most affectionate,
'EDWIN DROOD.

'P.S.  Love to Miss Pussy at the next music-lesson.'

'You expect Mr. Neville, then?' said Mr. Crisparkle.

'I count upon his coming,' said Mr. Jasper.

CHAPTER XI - A PICTURE AND A RING

BEHIND the most ancient part of Holborn, London, where certain 
gabled houses some centuries of age still stand looking on the 
public way, as if disconsolately looking for the Old Bourne that 
has long run dry, is a little nook composed of two irregular 
quadrangles, called Staple Inn.  It is one of those nooks, the 
turning into which out of the clashing street, imparts to the 
relieved pedestrian the sensation of having put cotton in his ears, 
and velvet soles on his boots.  It is one of those nooks where a 
few smoky sparrows twitter in smoky trees, as though they called to 
one another, 'Let us play at country,' and where a few feet of 
garden-mould and a few yards of gravel enable them to do that 
refreshing violence to their tiny understandings.  Moreover, it is 
one of those nooks which are legal nooks; and it contains a little 
Hall, with a little lantern in its roof:  to what obstructive 
purposes devoted, and at whose expense, this history knoweth not.

In the days when Cloisterham took offence at the existence of a 
railroad afar off, as menacing that sensitive constitution, the 
property of us Britons:  the odd fortune of which sacred 
institution it is to be in exactly equal degrees croaked about, 
trembled for, and boasted of, whatever happens to anything, 
anywhere in the world:  in those days no neighbouring architecture 
of lofty proportions had arisen to overshadow Staple Inn.  The 
westering sun bestowed bright glances on it, and the south-west 
wind blew into it unimpeded.

Neither wind nor sun, however, favoured Staple Inn one December 
afternoon towards six o'clock, when it was filled with fog, and 
candles shed murky and blurred rays through the windows of all its 
then-occupied sets of chambers; notably from a set of chambers in a 
corner house in the little inner quadrangle, presenting in black 
and white over its ugly portal the mysterious inscription:

          P
      J       T
         1747

In which set of chambers, never having troubled his head about the 
inscription, unless to bethink himself at odd times on glancing up 
at it, that haply it might mean Perhaps John Thomas, or Perhaps Joe 
Tyler, sat Mr. Grewgious writing by his fire.

Who could have told, by looking at Mr. Grewgious, whether he had 
ever known ambition or disappointment?  He had been bred to the 
Bar, and had laid himself out for chamber practice; to draw deeds; 
'convey the wise it call,' as Pistol says.  But Conveyancing and he 
had made such a very indifferent marriage of it that they had 
separated by consent - if there can be said to be separation where 
there has never been coming together.

No.  Coy Conveyancing would not come to Mr. Grewgious.  She was 
wooed, not won, and they went their several ways.  But an 
Arbitration being blown towards him by some unaccountable wind, and 
he gaining great credit in it as one indefatigable in seeking out 
right and doing right, a pretty fat Receivership was next blown 
into his pocket by a wind more traceable to its source.  So, by 
chance, he had found his niche.  Receiver and Agent now, to two 
rich estates, and deputing their legal business, in an amount worth 
having, to a firm of solicitors on the floor below, he had snuffed 
out his ambition (supposing him to have ever lighted it), and had 
settled down with his snuffers for the rest of his life under the 
dry vine and fig-tree of P. J. T., who planted in seventeen-forty-
seven.

Many accounts and account-books, many files of correspondence, and 
several strong boxes, garnished Mr. Grewgious's room.  They can 
scarcely be represented as having lumbered it, so conscientious and 
precise was their orderly arrangement.  The apprehension of dying 
suddenly, and leaving one fact or one figure with any 
incompleteness or obscurity attaching to it, would have stretched 
Mr. Grewgious stone-dead any day.  The largest fidelity to a trust 
was the life-blood of the man.  There are sorts of life-blood that 
course more quickly, more gaily, more attractively; but there is no 
better sort in circulation.

There was no luxury in his room.  Even its comforts were limited to 
its being dry and warm, and having a snug though faded fireside.  
What may be called its private life was confined to the hearth, and 
all easy-chair, and an old-fashioned occasional round table that 
was brought out upon the rug after business hours, from a corner 
where it elsewise remained turned up like a shining mahogany 
shield.  Behind it, when standing thus on the defensive, was a 
closet, usually containing something good to drink.  An outer room 
was the clerk's room; Mr. Grewgious's sleeping-room was across the 
common stair; and he held some not empty cellarage at the bottom of 
the common stair.  Three hundred days in the year, at least, he 
crossed over to the hotel in Furnival's Inn for his dinner, and 
after dinner crossed back again, to make the most of these 
simplicities until it should become broad business day once more, 
with P. J. T., date seventeen-forty-seven.

As Mr. Grewgious sat and wrote by his fire that afternoon, so did 
the clerk of Mr. Grewgious sit and write by HIS fire.  A pale, 
puffy-faced, dark-haired person of thirty, with big dark eyes that 
wholly wanted lustre, and a dissatisfied doughy complexion, that 
seemed to ask to be sent to the baker's, this attendant was a 
mysterious being, possessed of some strange power over Mr. 
Grewgious.  As though he had been called into existence, like a 
fabulous Familiar, by a magic spell which had failed when required 
to dismiss him, he stuck tight to Mr. Grewgious's stool, although 
Mr. Grewgious's comfort and convenience would manifestly have been 
advanced by dispossessing him.  A gloomy person with tangled locks, 
and a general air of having been reared under the shadow of that 
baleful tree of Java which has given shelter to more lies than the 
whole botanical kingdom, Mr. Grewgious, nevertheless, treated him 
with unaccountable consideration.

'Now, Bazzard,' said Mr. Grewgious, on the entrance of his clerk:  
looking up from his papers as he arranged them for the night:  
'what is in the wind besides fog?'

'Mr. Drood,' said Bazzard.

'What of him?'

'Has called,' said Bazzard.

'You might have shown him in.'

'I am doing it,' said Bazzard.

The visitor came in accordingly.

'Dear me!' said Mr. Grewgious, looking round his pair of office 
candles.  'I thought you had called and merely left your name and 
gone.  How do you do, Mr. Edwin?  Dear me, you're choking!'

'It's this fog,' returned Edwin; 'and it makes my eyes smart, like 
Cayenne pepper.'

'Is it really so bad as that?  Pray undo your wrappers.  It's 
fortunate I have so good a fire; but Mr. Bazzard has taken care of 
me.'

'No I haven't,' said Mr. Bazzard at the door.

'Ah! then it follows that I must have taken care of myself without 
observing it,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'Pray be seated in my chair.  
No.  I beg!  Coming out of such an atmosphere, in MY chair.'

Edwin took the easy-chair in the corner; and the fog he had brought 
in with him, and the fog he took off with his greatcoat and neck-
shawl, was speedily licked up by the eager fire.

'I look,' said Edwin, smiling, 'as if I had come to stop.'

' - By the by,' cried Mr. Grewgious; 'excuse my interrupting you; 
do stop.  The fog may clear in an hour or two.  We can have dinner 
in from just across Holborn.  You had better take your Cayenne 
pepper here than outside; pray stop and dine.'

'You are very kind,' said Edwin, glancing about him as though 
attracted by the notion of a new and relishing sort of gipsy-party.

'Not at all,' said Mr. Grewgious; 'YOU are very kind to join issue 
with a bachelor in chambers, and take pot-luck.  And I'll ask,' 
said Mr. Grewgious, dropping his voice, and speaking with a 
twinkling eye, as if inspired with a bright thought:  'I'll ask 
Bazzard.  He mightn't like it else. - Bazzard!'

Bazzard reappeared.

'Dine presently with Mr. Drood and me.'

'If I am ordered to dine, of course I will, sir,' was the gloomy 
answer.

'Save the man!' cried Mr. Grewgious.  'You're not ordered; you're 
invited.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Bazzard; 'in that case I don't care if I 
do.'

'That's arranged.  And perhaps you wouldn't mind,' said Mr. 
Grewgious, 'stepping over to the hotel in Furnival's, and asking 
them to send in materials for laying the cloth.  For dinner we'll 
have a tureen of the hottest and strongest soup available, and 
we'll have the best made-dish that can be recommended, and we'll 
have a joint (such as a haunch of mutton), and we'll have a goose, 
or a turkey, or any little stuffed thing of that sort that may 
happen to be in the bill of fare - in short, we'll have whatever 
there is on hand.'

These liberal directions Mr. Grewgious issued with his usual air of 
reading an inventory, or repeating a lesson, or doing anything else 
by rote.  Bazzard, after drawing out the round table, withdrew to 
execute them.

'I was a little delicate, you see,' said Mr. Grewgious, in a lower 
tone, after his clerk's departure, 'about employing him in the 
foraging or commissariat department.  Because he mightn't like it.'

'He seems to have his own way, sir,' remarked Edwin.

'His own way?' returned Mr. Grewgious.  'O dear no!  Poor fellow, 
you quite mistake him.  If he had his own way, he wouldn't be 
here.'

'I wonder where he would be!' Edwin thought.  But he only thought 
it, because Mr. Grewgious came and stood himself with his back to 
the other corner of the fire, and his shoulder-blades against the 
chimneypiece, and collected his skirts for easy conversation.

'I take it, without having the gift of prophecy, that you have done 
me the favour of looking in to mention that you are going down 
yonder - where I can tell you, you are expected - and to offer to 
execute any little commission from me to my charming ward, and 
perhaps to sharpen me up a bit in any proceedings?  Eh, Mr. Edwin?'

'I called, sir, before going down, as an act of attention.'

'Of attention!' said Mr. Grewgious.  'Ah! of course, not of 
impatience?'

'Impatience, sir?'

Mr. Grewgious had meant to be arch - not that he in the remotest 
degree expressed that meaning - and had brought himself into 
scarcely supportable proximity with the fire, as if to burn the 
fullest effect of his archness into himself, as other subtle 
impressions are burnt into hard metals.  But his archness suddenly 
flying before the composed face and manner of his visitor, and only 
the fire remaining, he started and rubbed himself.

'I have lately been down yonder,' said Mr. Grewgious, rearranging 
his skirts; 'and that was what I referred to, when I said I could 
tell you you are expected.'

'Indeed, sir!  Yes; I knew that Pussy was looking out for me.'

'Do you keep a cat down there?' asked Mr. Grewgious.

Edwin coloured a little as he explained:  'I call Rosa Pussy.'

'O, really,' said Mr. Grewgious, smoothing down his head; 'that's 
very affable.'

Edwin glanced at his face, uncertain whether or no he seriously 
objected to the appellation.  But Edwin might as well have glanced 
at the face of a clock.

'A pet name, sir,' he explained again.

'Umps,' said Mr. Grewgious, with a nod.  But with such an 
extraordinary compromise between an unqualified assent and a 
qualified dissent, that his visitor was much disconcerted.

'Did PRosa - ' Edwin began by way of recovering himself.

'PRosa?' repeated Mr. Grewgious.

'I was going to say Pussy, and changed my mind; - did she tell you 
anything about the Landlesses?'

'No,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'What is the Landlesses?  An estate?  A 
villa?  A farm?'

'A brother and sister.  The sister is at the Nuns' House, and has 
become a great friend of P - '

'PRosa's,' Mr. Grewgious struck in, with a fixed face.

'She is a strikingly handsome girl, sir, and I thought she might 
have been described to you, or presented to you perhaps?'

'Neither,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'But here is Bazzard.'

Bazzard returned, accompanied by two waiters - an immovable waiter, 
and a flying waiter; and the three brought in with them as much fog 
as gave a new roar to the fire.  The flying waiter, who had brought 
everything on his shoulders, laid the cloth with amazing rapidity 
and dexterity; while the immovable waiter, who had brought nothing, 
found fault with him.  The flying waiter then highly polished all 
the glasses he had brought, and the immovable waiter looked through 
them.  The flying waiter then flew across Holborn for the soup, and 
flew back again, and then took another flight for the made-dish, 
and flew back again, and then took another flight for the joint and 
poultry, and flew back again, and between whiles took supplementary 
flights for a great variety of articles, as it was discovered from 
time to time that the immovable waiter had forgotten them all.  But 
let the flying waiter cleave the air as he might, he was always 
reproached on his return by the immovable waiter for bringing fog 
with him, and being out of breath.  At the conclusion of the 
repast, by which time the flying waiter was severely blown, the 
immovable waiter gathered up the tablecloth under his arm with a 
grand air, and having sternly (not to say with indignation) looked 
on at the flying waiter while he set the clean glasses round, 
directed a valedictory glance towards Mr. Grewgious, conveying:  
'Let it be clearly understood between us that the reward is mine, 
and that Nil is the claim of this slave,' and pushed the flying 
waiter before him out of the room.

It was like a highly-finished miniature painting representing My 
Lords of the Circumlocution Department, Commandership-in-Chief of 
any sort, Government.  It was quite an edifying little picture to 
be hung on the line in the National Gallery.

As the fog had been the proximate cause of this sumptuous repast, 
so the fog served for its general sauce.  To hear the out-door 
clerks sneezing, wheezing, and beating their feet on the gravel was 
a zest far surpassing Doctor Kitchener's.  To bid, with a shiver, 
the unfortunate flying waiter shut the door before he had opened 
it, was a condiment of a profounder flavour than Harvey.  And here 
let it be noticed, parenthetically, that the leg of this young man, 
in its application to the door, evinced the finest sense of touch:  
always preceding himself and tray (with something of an angling air 
about it), by some seconds:  and always lingering after he and the 
tray had disappeared, like Macbeth's leg when accompanying him off 
the stage with reluctance to the assassination of Duncan.

The host had gone below to the cellar, and had brought up bottles 
of ruby, straw-coloured, and golden drinks, which had ripened long 
ago in lands where no fogs are, and had since lain slumbering in 
the shade.  Sparkling and tingling after so long a nap, they pushed 
at their corks to help the corkscrew (like prisoners helping 
rioters to force their gates), and danced out gaily.  If P. J. T. 
in seventeen-forty-seven, or in any other year of his period, drank 
such wines - then, for a certainty, P. J. T. was Pretty Jolly Too.

Externally, Mr. Grewgious showed no signs of being mellowed by 
these glowing vintages.  Instead of his drinking them, they might 
have been poured over him in his high-dried snuff form, and run to 
waste, for any lights and shades they caused to flicker over his 
face.  Neither was his manner influenced.  But, in his wooden way, 
he had observant eyes for Edwin; and when at the end of dinner, he 
motioned Edwin back to his own easy-chair in the fireside corner, 
and Edwin sank luxuriously into it after very brief remonstrance, 
Mr. Grewgious, as he turned his seat round towards the fire too, 
and smoothed his head and face, might have been seen looking at his 
visitor between his smoothing fingers.

'Bazzard!' said Mr. Grewgious, suddenly turning to him.

'I follow you, sir,' returned Bazzard; who had done his work of 
consuming meat and drink in a workmanlike manner, though mostly in 
speechlessness.

'I drink to you, Bazzard; Mr. Edwin, success to Mr. Bazzard!'

'Success to Mr. Bazzard!' echoed Edwin, with a totally unfounded 
appearance of enthusiasm, and with the unspoken addition:  'What 
in, I wonder!'

'And May!' pursued Mr. Grewgious - 'I am not at liberty to be 
definite - May! - my conversational powers are so very limited that 
I know I shall not come well out of this - May! - it ought to be 
put imaginatively, but I have no imagination - May! - the thorn of 
anxiety is as nearly the mark as I am likely to get - May it come 
out at last!'

Mr. Bazzard, with a frowning smile at the fire, put a hand into his 
tangled locks, as if the thorn of anxiety were there; then into his 
waistcoat, as if it were there; then into his pockets, as if it 
were there.  In all these movements he was closely followed by the 
eyes of Edwin, as if that young gentleman expected to see the thorn 
in action.  It was not produced, however, and Mr. Bazzard merely 
said:  'I follow you, sir, and I thank you.'

'I am going,' said Mr. Grewgious, jingling his glass on the table 
with one hand, and bending aside under cover of the other, to 
whisper to Edwin, 'to drink to my ward.  But I put Bazzard first.  
He mightn't like it else.'

This was said with a mysterious wink; or what would have been a 
wink, if, in Mr. Grewgious's hands, it could have been quick 
enough.  So Edwin winked responsively, without the least idea what 
he meant by doing so.

'And now,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I devote a bumper to the fair and 
fascinating Miss Rosa.  Bazzard, the fair and fascinating Miss 
Rosa!'

'I follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and I pledge you!'

'And so do I!' said Edwin.

'Lord bless me,' cried Mr. Grewgious, breaking the blank silence 
which of course ensued:  though why these pauses SHOULD come upon 
us when we have performed any small social rite, not directly 
inducive of self-examination or mental despondency, who can tell?  
'I am a particularly Angular man, and yet I fancy (if I may use the 
word, not having a morsel of fancy), that I could draw a picture of 
a true lover's state of mind, to-night.'

'Let us follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and have the picture.'

'Mr. Edwin will correct it where it's wrong,' resumed Mr. 
Grewgious, 'and will throw in a few touches from the life.  I dare 
say it is wrong in many particulars, and wants many touches from 
the life, for I was born a Chip, and have neither soft sympathies 
nor soft experiences.  Well!  I hazard the guess that the true 
lover's mind is completely permeated by the beloved object of his 
affections.  I hazard the guess that her dear name is precious to 
him, cannot be heard or repeated without emotion, and is preserved 
sacred.  If he has any distinguishing appellation of fondness for 
her, it is reserved for her, and is not for common ears.  A name 
that it would be a privilege to call her by, being alone with her 
own bright self, it would be a liberty, a coldness, an 
insensibility, almost a breach of good faith, to flaunt elsewhere.'

It was wonderful to see Mr. Grewgious sitting bolt upright, with 
his hands on his knees, continuously chopping this discourse out of 
himself:  much as a charity boy with a very good memory might get 
his catechism said:  and evincing no correspondent emotion 
whatever, unless in a certain occasional little tingling 
perceptible at the end of his nose.

'My picture,' Mr. Grewgious proceeded, 'goes on to represent (under 
correction from you, Mr. Edwin), the true lover as ever impatient 
to be in the presence or vicinity of the beloved object of his 
affections; as caring very little for his case in any other 
society; and as constantly seeking that.  If I was to say seeking 
that, as a bird seeks its nest, I should make an ass of myself, 
because that would trench upon what I understand to be poetry; and 
I am so far from trenching upon poetry at any time, that I never, 
to my knowledge, got within ten thousand miles of it.  And I am 
besides totally unacquainted with the habits of birds, except the 
birds of Staple Inn, who seek their nests on ledges, and in gutter-
pipes and chimneypots, not constructed for them by the beneficent 
hand of Nature.  I beg, therefore, to be understood as foregoing 
the bird's-nest.  But my picture does represent the true lover as 
having no existence separable from that of the beloved object of 
his affections, and as living at once a doubled life and a halved 
life.  And if I do not clearly express what I mean by that, it is 
either for the reason that having no conversational powers, I 
cannot express what I mean, or that having no meaning, I do not 
mean what I fail to express.  Which, to the best of my belief, is 
not the case.'

Edwin had turned red and turned white, as certain points of this 
picture came into the light.  He now sat looking at the fire, and 
bit his lip.

'The speculations of an Angular man,' resumed Mr. Grewgious, still 
sitting and speaking exactly as before, 'are probably erroneous on 
so globular a topic.  But I figure to myself (subject, as before, 
to Mr. Edwin's correction), that there can be no coolness, no 
lassitude, no doubt, no indifference, no half fire and half smoke 
state of mind, in a real lover.  Pray am I at all near the mark in 
my picture?'

As abrupt in his conclusion as in his commencement and progress, he 
jerked this inquiry at Edwin, and stopped when one might have 
supposed him in the middle of his oration.

'I should say, sir,' stammered Edwin, 'as you refer the question to 
me - '

'Yes,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I refer it to you, as an authority.'

'I should say, then, sir,' Edwin went on, embarrassed, 'that the 
picture you have drawn is generally correct; but I submit that 
perhaps you may be rather hard upon the unlucky lover.'

'Likely so,' assented Mr. Grewgious, 'likely so.  I am a hard man 
in the grain.'

'He may not show,' said Edwin, 'all he feels; or he may not - '

There he stopped so long, to find the rest of his sentence, that 
Mr. Grewgious rendered his difficulty a thousand times the greater 
by unexpectedly striking in with:

'No to be sure; he MAY not!'

After that, they all sat silent; the silence of Mr. Bazzard being 
occasioned by slumber.

'His responsibility is very great, though,' said Mr. Grewgious at 
length, with his eyes on the fire.

Edwin nodded assent, with HIS eyes on the fire.

'And let him be sure that he trifles with no one,' said Mr. 
Grewgious; 'neither with himself, nor with any other.'

Edwin bit his lip again, and still sat looking at the fire.

'He must not make a plaything of a treasure.  Woe betide him if he 
does!  Let him take that well to heart,' said Mr. Grewgious.

Though he said these things in short sentences, much as the 
supposititious charity boy just now referred to might have repeated 
a verse or two from the Book of Proverbs, there was something 
dreamy (for so literal a man) in the way in which he now shook his 
right forefinger at the live coals in the grate, and again fell 
silent.

But not for long.  As he sat upright and stiff in his chair, he 
suddenly rapped his knees, like the carved image of some queer Joss 
or other coming out of its reverie, and said:  'We must finish this 
bottle, Mr. Edwin.  Let me help you.  I'll help Bazzard too, though 
he IS asleep.  He mightn't like it else.'

He helped them both, and helped himself, and drained his glass, and 
stood it bottom upward on the table, as though he had just caught a 
bluebottle in it.

'And now, Mr. Edwin,' he proceeded, wiping his mouth and hands upon 
his handkerchief:  'to a little piece of business.  You received 
from me, the other day, a certified copy of Miss Rosa's father's 
will.  You knew its contents before, but you received it from me as 
a matter of business.  I should have sent it to Mr. Jasper, but for 
Miss Rosa's wishing it to come straight to you, in preference.  You 
received it?'

'Quite safely, sir.'

'You should have acknowledged its receipt,' said Mr. Grewgious; 
'business being business all the world over.  However, you did 
not.'

'I meant to have acknowledged it when I first came in this evening, 
sir.'

'Not a business-like acknowledgment,' returned Mr. Grewgious; 
'however, let that pass.  Now, in that document you have observed a 
few words of kindly allusion to its being left to me to discharge a 
little trust, confided to me in conversation, at such time as I in 
my discretion may think best.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Mr. Edwin, it came into my mind just now, when I was looking at 
the fire, that I could, in my discretion, acquit myself of that 
trust at no better time than the present.  Favour me with your 
attention, half a minute.'

He took a bunch of keys from his pocket, singled out by the candle-
light the key he wanted, and then, with a candle in his hand, went 
to a bureau or escritoire, unlocked it, touched the spring of a 
little secret drawer, and took from it an ordinary ring-case made 
for a single ring.  With this in his hand, he returned to his 
chair.  As he held it up for the young man to see, his hand 
trembled.

'Mr. Edwin, this rose of diamonds and rubies delicately set in 
gold, was a ring belonging to Miss Rosa's mother.  It was removed 
from her dead hand, in my presence, with such distracted grief as I 
hope it may never be my lot to contemplate again.  Hard man as I 
am, I am not hard enough for that.  See how bright these stones 
shine!' opening the case.  'And yet the eyes that were so much 
brighter, and that so often looked upon them with a light and a 
proud heart, have been ashes among ashes, and dust among dust, some 
years!  If I had any imagination (which it is needless to say I 
have not), I might imagine that the lasting beauty of these stones 
was almost cruel.'

He closed the case again as he spoke.

'This ring was given to the young lady who was drowned so early in 
her beautiful and happy career, by her husband, when they first 
plighted their faith to one another.  It was he who removed it from 
her unconscious hand, and it was he who, when his death drew very 
near, placed it in mine.  The trust in which I received it, was, 
that, you and Miss Rosa growing to manhood and womanhood, and your 
betrothal prospering and coming to maturity, I should give it to 
you to place upon her finger.  Failing those desired results, it 
was to remain in my possession.'

Some trouble was in the young man's face, and some indecision was 
in the action of his hand, as Mr. Grewgious, looking steadfastly at 
him, gave him the ring.

'Your placing it on her finger,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'will be the 
solemn seal upon your strict fidelity to the living and the dead.  
You are going to her, to make the last irrevocable preparations for 
your marriage.  Take it with you.'

The young man took the little case, and placed it in his breast.

'If anything should be amiss, if anything should be even slightly 
wrong, between you; if you should have any secret consciousness 
that you are committing yourself to this step for no higher reason 
than because you have long been accustomed to look forward to it; 
then,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I charge you once more, by the living 
and by the dead, to bring that ring back to me!'

Here Bazzard awoke himself by his own snoring; and, as is usual in 
such cases, sat apoplectically staring at vacancy, as defying 
vacancy to accuse him of having been asleep.

'Bazzard!' said Mr. Grewgious, harder than ever.

'I follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and I have been following you.'

'In discharge of a trust, I have handed Mr. Edwin Drood a ring of 
diamonds and rubies.  You see?'

Edwin reproduced the little case, and opened it; and Bazzard looked 
into it.

'I follow you both, sir,' returned Bazzard, 'and I witness the 
transaction.'

Evidently anxious to get away and be alone, Edwin Drood now resumed 
his outer clothing, muttering something about time and 
appointments.  The fog was reported no clearer (by the flying 
waiter, who alighted from a speculative flight in the coffee 
interest), but he went out into it; and Bazzard, after his manner, 
'followed' him.

Mr. Grewgious, left alone, walked softly and slowly to and fro, for 
an hour and more.  He was restless to-night, and seemed dispirited.

'I hope I have done right,' he said.  'The appeal to him seemed 
necessary.  It was hard to lose the ring, and yet it must have gone 
from me very soon.'

He closed the empty little drawer with a sigh, and shut and locked 
the escritoire, and came back to the solitary fireside.

'Her ring,' he went on.  'Will it come back to me?  My mind hangs 
about her ring very uneasily to-night.  But that is explainable.  I 
have had it so long, and I have prized it so much!  I wonder - '

He was in a wondering mood as well as a restless; for, though he 
checked himself at that point, and took another walk, he resumed 
his wondering when he sat down again.

'I wonder (for the ten-thousandth time, and what a weak fool I, for 
what can it signify now!) whether he confided the charge of their 
orphan child to me, because he knew - Good God, how like her mother 
she has become!'

'I wonder whether he ever so much as suspected that some one doted 
on her, at a hopeless, speechless distance, when he struck in and 
won her.  I wonder whether it ever crept into his mind who that 
unfortunate some one was!'

'I wonder whether I shall sleep to-night!  At all events, I will 
shut out the world with the bedclothes, and try.'

Mr. Grewgious crossed the staircase to his raw and foggy bedroom, 
and was soon ready for bed.  Dimly catching sight of his face in 
the misty looking-glass, he held his candle to it for a moment.

'A likely some one, YOU, to come into anybody's thoughts in such an 
aspect!' he exclaimed.  'There! there! there!  Get to bed, poor 
man, and cease to jabber!'

With that, he extinguished his light, pulled up the bedclothes 
around him, and with another sigh shut out the world.  And yet 
there are such unexplored romantic nooks in the unlikeliest men, 
that even old tinderous and touchwoody P. J. T. Possibly Jabbered 
Thus, at some odd times, in or about seventeen-forty-seven.

CHAPTER XII - A NIGHT WITH DURDLES

WHEN Mr. Sapsea has nothing better to do, towards evening, and 
finds the contemplation of his own profundity becoming a little 
monotonous in spite of the vastness of the subject, he often takes 
an airing in the Cathedral Close and thereabout.  He likes to pass 
the churchyard with a swelling air of proprietorship, and to 
encourage in his breast a sort of benignant-landlord feeling, in 
that he has been bountiful towards that meritorious tenant, Mrs. 
Sapsea, and has publicly given her a prize.  He likes to see a 
stray face or two looking in through the railings, and perhaps 
reading his inscription.  Should he meet a stranger coming from the 
churchyard with a quick step, he is morally convinced that the 
stranger is 'with a blush retiring,' as monumentally directed.

Mr. Sapsea's importance has received enhancement, for he has become 
Mayor of Cloisterham.  Without mayors, and many of them, it cannot 
be disputed that the whole framework of society - Mr. Sapsea is 
confident that he invented that forcible figure - would fall to 
pieces.  Mayors have been knighted for 'going up' with addresses:  
explosive machines intrepidly discharging shot and shell into the 
English Grammar.  Mr. Sapsea may 'go up' with an address.  Rise, 
Sir Thomas Sapsea!  Of such is the salt of the earth.

Mr. Sapsea has improved the acquaintance of Mr. Jasper, since their 
first meeting to partake of port, epitaph, backgammon, beef, and 
salad.  Mr. Sapsea has been received at the gatehouse with kindred 
hospitality; and on that occasion Mr. Jasper seated himself at the 
piano, and sang to him, tickling his ears - figuratively - long 
enough to present a considerable area for tickling.  What Mr. 
Sapsea likes in that young man is, that he is always ready to 
profit by the wisdom of his elders, and that he is sound, sir, at 
the core.  In proof of which, he sang to Mr. Sapsea that evening, 
no kickshaw ditties, favourites with national enemies, but gave him 
the genuine George the Third home-brewed; exhorting him (as 'my 
brave boys') to reduce to a smashed condition all other islands but 
this island, and all continents, peninsulas, isthmuses, 
promontories, and other geographical forms of land soever, besides 
sweeping the seas in all directions.  In short, he rendered it 
pretty clear that Providence made a distinct mistake in originating 
so small a nation of hearts of oak, and so many other verminous 
peoples.

Mr. Sapsea, walking slowly this moist evening near the churchyard 
with his hands behind him, on the look-out for a blushing and 
retiring stranger, turns a corner, and comes instead into the 
goodly presence of the Dean, conversing with the Verger and Mr. 
Jasper.  Mr. Sapsea makes his obeisance, and is instantly stricken 
far more ecclesiastical than any Archbishop of York or Canterbury.

'You are evidently going to write a book about us, Mr. Jasper,' 
quoth the Dean; 'to write a book about us.  Well!  We are very 
ancient, and we ought to make a good book.  We are not so richly 
endowed in possessions as in age; but perhaps you will put THAT in 
your book, among other things, and call attention to our wrongs.'

Mr. Tope, as in duty bound, is greatly entertained by this.

'I really have no intention at all, sir,' replies Jasper, 'of 
turning author or archaeologist.  It is but a whim of mine.  And 
even for my whim, Mr. Sapsea here is more accountable than I am.'

'How so, Mr. Mayor?' says the Dean, with a nod of good-natured 
recognition of his Fetch.  'How is that, Mr. Mayor?'

'I am not aware,' Mr. Sapsea remarks, looking about him for 
information, 'to what the Very Reverend the Dean does me the honour 
of referring.'  And then falls to studying his original in minute 
points of detail.

'Durdles,' Mr. Tope hints.

'Ay!' the Dean echoes; 'Durdles, Durdles!'

'The truth is, sir,' explains Jasper, 'that my curiosity in the man 
was first really stimulated by Mr. Sapsea.  Mr. Sapsea's knowledge 
of mankind and power of drawing out whatever is recluse or odd 
around him, first led to my bestowing a second thought upon the 
man:  though of course I had met him constantly about.  You would 
not be surprised by this, Mr. Dean, if you had seen Mr. Sapsea deal 
with him in his own parlour, as I did.'

'O!' cries Sapsea, picking up the ball thrown to him with ineffable 
complacency and pomposity; 'yes, yes.  The Very Reverend the Dean 
refers to that?  Yes.  I happened to bring Durdles and Mr. Jasper 
together.  I regard Durdles as a Character.'

'A character, Mr. Sapsea, that with a few skilful touches you turn 
inside out,' says Jasper.

'Nay, not quite that,' returns the lumbering auctioneer.  'I may 
have a little influence over him, perhaps; and a little insight 
into his character, perhaps.  The Very Reverend the Dean will 
please to bear in mind that I have seen the world.'  Here Mr. 
Sapsea gets a little behind the Dean, to inspect his coat-buttons.

'Well!' says the Dean, looking about him to see what has become of 
his copyist:  'I hope, Mr. Mayor, you will use your study and 
knowledge of Durdles to the good purpose of exhorting him not to 
break our worthy and respected Choir-Master's neck; we cannot 
afford it; his head and voice are much too valuable to us.'

Mr. Tope is again highly entertained, and, having fallen into 
respectful convulsions of laughter, subsides into a deferential 
murmur, importing that surely any gentleman would deem it a 
pleasure and an honour to have his neck broken, in return for such 
a compliment from such a source.

'I will take it upon myself, sir,' observes Sapsea loftily, 'to 
answer for Mr. Jasper's neck.  I will tell Durdles to be careful of 
it.  He will mind what I say.  How is it at present endangered?' he 
inquires, looking about him with magnificent patronage.

'Only by my making a moonlight expedition with Durdles among the 
tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins,' returns Jasper.  'You remember 
suggesting, when you brought us together, that, as a lover of the 
picturesque, it might be worth my while?'

'I remember!' replies the auctioneer.  And the solemn idiot really 
believes that he does remember.

'Profiting by your hint,' pursues Jasper, 'I have had some day-
rambles with the extraordinary old fellow, and we are to make a 
moonlight hole-and-corner exploration to-night.'

'And here he is,' says the Dean.

Durdles with his dinner-bundle in his hand, is indeed beheld 
slouching towards them.  Slouching nearer, and perceiving the Dean, 
he pulls off his hat, and is slouching away with it under his arm, 
when Mr. Sapsea stops him.

'Mind you take care of my friend,' is the injunction Mr. Sapsea 
lays upon him.

'What friend o' yourn is dead?' asks Durdles.  'No orders has come 
in for any friend o' yourn.'

'I mean my live friend there.'

'O! him?' says Durdles.  'He can take care of himself, can Mister 
Jarsper.'

'But do you take care of him too,' says Sapsea.

Whom Durdles (there being command in his tone) surlily surveys from 
head to foot.

'With submission to his Reverence the Dean, if you'll mind what 
concerns you, Mr. Sapsea, Durdles he'll mind what concerns him.'

'You're out of temper,' says Mr. Sapsea, winking to the company to 
observe how smoothly he will manage him.  'My friend concerns me, 
and Mr. Jasper is my friend.  And you are my friend.'

'Don't you get into a bad habit of boasting,' retorts Durdles, with 
a grave cautionary nod.  'It'll grow upon you.'

'You are out of temper,' says Sapsea again; reddening, but again 
sinking to the company.

'I own to it,' returns Durdles; 'I don't like liberties.'

Mr. Sapsea winks a third wink to the company, as who should say:  
'I think you will agree with me that I have settled HIS business;' 
and stalks out of the controversy.

Durdles then gives the Dean a good evening, and adding, as he puts 
his hat on, 'You'll find me at home, Mister Jarsper, as agreed, 
when you want me; I'm a-going home to clean myself,' soon slouches 
out of sight.  This going home to clean himself is one of the man's 
incomprehensible compromises with inexorable facts; he, and his 
hat, and his boots, and his clothes, never showing any trace of 
cleaning, but being uniformly in one condition of dust and grit.

The lamplighter now dotting the quiet Close with specks of light, 
and running at a great rate up and down his little ladder with that 
object - his little ladder under the sacred shadow of whose 
inconvenience generations had grown up, and which all Cloisterham 
would have stood aghast at the idea of abolishing - the Dean 
withdraws to his dinner, Mr. Tope to his tea, and Mr. Jasper to his 
piano.  There, with no light but that of the fire, he sits chanting 
choir-music in a low and beautiful voice, for two or three hours; 
in short, until it has been for some time dark, and the moon is 
about to rise.

Then he closes his piano softly, softly changes his coat for a pea-
jacket, with a goodly wicker-cased bottle in its largest pocket, 
and putting on a low-crowned, flap-brimmed hat, goes softly out.  
Why does he move so softly to-night?  No outward reason is apparent 
for it.  Can there be any sympathetic reason crouching darkly 
within him?

Repairing to Durdles's unfinished house, or hole in the city wall, 
and seeing a light within it, he softly picks his course among the 
gravestones, monuments, and stony lumber of the yard, already 
touched here and there, sidewise, by the rising moon.  The two 
journeymen have left their two great saws sticking in their blocks 
of stone; and two skeleton journeymen out of the Dance of Death 
might be grinning in the shadow of their sheltering sentry-boxes, 
about to slash away at cutting out the gravestones of the next two 
people destined to die in Cloisterham.  Likely enough, the two 
think little of that now, being alive, and perhaps merry.  Curious, 
to make a guess at the two; - or say one of the two!

'Ho!  Durdles!'

The light moves, and he appears with it at the door.  He would seem 
to have been 'cleaning himself' with the aid of a bottle, jug, and 
tumbler; for no other cleansing instruments are visible in the bare 
brick room with rafters overhead and no plastered ceiling, into 
which he shows his visitor.

'Are you ready?'

'I am ready, Mister Jarsper.  Let the old uns come out if they 
dare, when we go among their tombs.  My spirit is ready for 'em.'

'Do you mean animal spirits, or ardent?'

'The one's the t'other,' answers Durdles, 'and I mean 'em both.'

He takes a lantern from a hook, puts a match or two in his pocket 
wherewith to light it, should there be need; and they go out 
together, dinner-bundle and all.

Surely an unaccountable sort of expedition!  That Durdles himself, 
who is always prowling among old graves, and ruins, like a Ghoul - 
that he should be stealing forth to climb, and dive, and wander 
without an object, is nothing extraordinary; but that the Choir-
Master or any one else should hold it worth his while to be with 
him, and to study moonlight effects in such company is another 
affair.  Surely an unaccountable sort of expedition, therefore!

''Ware that there mound by the yard-gate, Mister Jarsper.'

'I see it.  What is it?'

'Lime.'

Mr. Jasper stops, and waits for him to come up, for he lags behind.  
'What you call quick-lime?'

'Ay!' says Durdles; 'quick enough to eat your boots.  With a little 
handy stirring, quick enough to eat your bones.'

They go on, presently passing the red windows of the Travellers' 
Twopenny, and emerging into the clear moonlight of the Monks' 
Vineyard.  This crossed, they come to Minor Canon Corner:  of which 
the greater part lies in shadow until the moon shall rise higher in 
the sky.

The sound of a closing house-door strikes their ears, and two men 
come out.  These are Mr. Crisparkle and Neville.  Jasper, with a 
strange and sudden smile upon his face, lays the palm of his hand 
upon the breast of Durdles, stopping him where he stands.

At that end of Minor Canon Corner the shadow is profound in the 
existing state of the light:  at that end, too, there is a piece of 
old dwarf wall, breast high, the only remaining boundary of what 
was once a garden, but is now the thoroughfare.  Jasper and Durdles 
would have turned this wall in another instant; but, stopping so 
short, stand behind it.

'Those two are only sauntering,' Jasper whispers; 'they will go out 
into the moonlight soon.  Let us keep quiet here, or they will 
detain us, or want to join us, or what not.'

Durdles nods assent, and falls to munching some fragments from his 
bundle.  Jasper folds his arms upon the top of the wall, and, with 
his chin resting on them, watches.  He takes no note whatever of 
the Minor Canon, but watches Neville, as though his eye were at the 
trigger of a loaded rifle, and he had covered him, and were going 
to fire.  A sense of destructive power is so expressed in his face, 
that even Durdles pauses in his munching, and looks at him, with an 
unmunched something in his cheek.

Meanwhile Mr. Crisparkle and Neville walk to and fro, quietly 
talking together.  What they say, cannot be heard consecutively; 
but Mr. Jasper has already distinguished his own name more than 
once.

'This is the first day of the week,' Mr. Crisparkle can be 
distinctly heard to observe, as they turn back; 'and the last day 
of the week is Christmas Eve.'

'You may be certain of me, sir.'

The echoes were favourable at those points, but as the two 
approach, the sound of their talking becomes confused again.  The 
word 'confidence,' shattered by the echoes, but still capable of 
being pieced together, is uttered by Mr. Crisparkle.  As they draw 
still nearer, this fragment of a reply is heard:  'Not deserved 
yet, but shall be, sir.'  As they turn away again, Jasper again 
hears his own name, in connection with the words from Mr. 
Crisparkle:  'Remember that I said I answered for you confidently.'  
Then the sound of their talk becomes confused again; they halting 
for a little while, and some earnest action on the part of Neville 
succeeding.  When they move once more, Mr. Crisparkle is seen to 
look up at the sky, and to point before him.  They then slowly 
disappear; passing out into the moonlight at the opposite end of 
the Corner.

It is not until they are gone, that Mr. Jasper moves.  But then he 
turns to Durdles, and bursts into a fit of laughter.  Durdles, who 
still has that suspended something in his cheek, and who sees 
nothing to laugh at, stares at him until Mr. Jasper lays his face 
down on his arms to have his laugh out.  Then Durdles bolts the 
something, as if desperately resigning himself to indigestion.

Among those secluded nooks there is very little stir or movement 
after dark.  There is little enough in the high tide of the day, 
but there is next to none at night.  Besides that the cheerfully 
frequented High Street lies nearly parallel to the spot (the old 
Cathedral rising between the two), and is the natural channel in 
which the Cloisterham traffic flows, a certain awful hush pervades 
the ancient pile, the cloisters, and the churchyard, after dark, 
which not many people care to encounter.  Ask the first hundred 
citizens of Cloisterham, met at random in the streets at noon, if 
they believed in Ghosts, they would tell you no; but put them to 
choose at night between these eerie Precincts and the thoroughfare 
of shops, and you would find that ninety-nine declared for the 
longer round and the more frequented way.  The cause of this is not 
to be found in any local superstition that attaches to the 
Precincts - albeit a mysterious lady, with a child in her arms and 
a rope dangling from her neck, has been seen flitting about there 
by sundry witnesses as intangible as herself - but it is to be 
sought in the innate shrinking of dust with the breath of life in 
it from dust out of which the breath of life has passed; also, in 
the widely diffused, and almost as widely unacknowledged, 
reflection:  'If the dead do, under any circumstances, become 
visible to the living, these are such likely surroundings for the 
purpose that I, the living, will get out of them as soon as I can.'  
Hence, when Mr. Jasper and Durdles pause to glance around them, 
before descending into the crypt by a small side door, of which the 
latter has a key, the whole expanse of moonlight in their view is 
utterly deserted.  One might fancy that the tide of life was 
stemmed by Mr. Jasper's own gatehouse.  The murmur of the tide is 
heard beyond; but no wave passes the archway, over which his lamp 
burns red behind his curtain, as if the building were a Lighthouse.

They enter, locking themselves in, descend the rugged steps, and 
are down in the Crypt.  The lantern is not wanted, for the 
moonlight strikes in at the groined windows, bare of glass, the 
broken frames for which cast patterns on the ground.  The heavy 
pillars which support the roof engender masses of black shade, but 
between them there are lanes of light.  Up and down these lanes 
they walk, Durdles discoursing of the 'old uns' he yet counts on 
disinterring, and slapping a wall, in which he considers 'a whole 
family on 'em' to be stoned and earthed up, just as if he were a 
familiar friend of the family.  The taciturnity of Durdles is for 
the time overcome by Mr. Jasper's wicker bottle, which circulates 
freely; - in the sense, that is to say, that its contents enter 
freely into Mr. Durdles's circulation, while Mr. Jasper only rinses 
his mouth once, and casts forth the rinsing.

They are to ascend the great Tower.  On the steps by which they 
rise to the Cathedral, Durdles pauses for new store of breath.  The 
steps are very dark, but out of the darkness they can see the lanes 
of light they have traversed.  Durdles seats himself upon a step.  
Mr. Jasper seats himself upon another.  The odour from the wicker 
bottle (which has somehow passed into Durdles's keeping) soon 
intimates that the cork has been taken out; but this is not 
ascertainable through the sense of sight, since neither can descry 
the other.  And yet, in talking, they turn to one another, as 
though their faces could commune together.

'This is good stuff, Mister Jarsper!'

'It is very good stuff, I hope. - I bought it on purpose.'

'They don't show, you see, the old uns don't, Mister Jarsper!'

'It would be a more confused world than it is, if they could.'

'Well, it WOULD lead towards a mixing of things,' Durdles 
acquiesces:  pausing on the remark, as if the idea of ghosts had 
not previously presented itself to him in a merely inconvenient 
light, domestically or chronologically.  'But do you think there 
may be Ghosts of other things, though not of men and women?'

'What things?  Flower-beds and watering-pots? horses and harness?'

'No.  Sounds.'

'What sounds?'

'Cries.'

'What cries do you mean?  Chairs to mend?'

'No.  I mean screeches.  Now I'll tell you, Mr. Jarsper.  Wait a 
bit till I put the bottle right.'  Here the cork is evidently taken 
out again, and replaced again.  'There!  NOW it's right!  This time 
last year, only a few days later, I happened to have been doing 
what was correct by the season, in the way of giving it the welcome 
it had a right to expect, when them town-boys set on me at their 
worst.  At length I gave 'em the slip, and turned in here.  And 
here I fell asleep.  And what woke me?  The ghost of a cry.  The 
ghost of one terrific shriek, which shriek was followed by the 
ghost of the howl of a dog:  a long, dismal, woeful howl, such as a 
dog gives when a person's dead.  That was MY last Christmas Eve.'

'What do you mean?' is the very abrupt, and, one might say, fierce 
retort.

'I mean that I made inquiries everywhere about, and, that no living 
ears but mine heard either that cry or that howl.  So I say they 
was both ghosts; though why they came to me, I've never made out.'

'I thought you were another kind of man,' says Jasper, scornfully.

'So I thought myself,' answers Durdles with his usual composure; 
'and yet I was picked out for it.'

Jasper had risen suddenly, when he asked him what he meant, and he 
now says, 'Come; we shall freeze here; lead the way.'

Durdles complies, not over-steadily; opens the door at the top of 
the steps with the key he has already used; and so emerges on the 
Cathedral level, in a passage at the side of the chancel.  Here, 
the moonlight is so very bright again that the colours of the 
nearest stained-glass window are thrown upon their faces.  The 
appearance of the unconscious Durdles, holding the door open for 
his companion to follow, as if from the grave, is ghastly enough, 
with a purple hand across his face, and a yellow splash upon his 
brow; but he bears the close scrutiny of his companion in an 
insensible way, although it is prolonged while the latter fumbles 
among his pockets for a key confided to him that will open an iron 
gate, so to enable them to pass to the staircase of the great 
tower.

'That and the bottle are enough for you to carry,' he says, giving 
it to Durdles; 'hand your bundle to me; I am younger and longer-
winded than you.'  Durdles hesitates for a moment between bundle 
and bottle; but gives the preference to the bottle as being by far 
the better company, and consigns the dry weight to his fellow-
explorer.

Then they go up the winding staircase of the great tower, 
toilsomely, turning and turning, and lowering their heads to avoid 
the stairs above, or the rough stone pivot around which they twist.  
Durdles has lighted his lantern, by drawing from the cold, hard 
wall a spark of that mysterious fire which lurks in everything, 
and, guided by this speck, they clamber up among the cobwebs and 
the dust.  Their way lies through strange places.  Twice or thrice 
they emerge into level, low-arched galleries, whence they can look 
down into the moon-lit nave; and where Durdles, waving his lantern, 
waves the dim angels' heads upon the corbels of the roof, seeming 
to watch their progress.  Anon they turn into narrower and steeper 
staircases, and the night-air begins to blow upon them, and the 
chirp of some startled jackdaw or frightened rook precedes the 
heavy beating of wings in a confined space, and the beating down of 
dust and straws upon their heads.  At last, leaving their light 
behind a stair - for it blows fresh up here - they look down on 
Cloisterham, fair to see in the moonlight:  its ruined habitations 
and sanctuaries of the dead, at the tower's base:  its moss-
softened red-tiled roofs and red-brick houses of the living, 
clustered beyond:  its river winding down from the mist on the 
horizon, as though that were its source, and already heaving with a 
restless knowledge of its approach towards the sea.

Once again, an unaccountable expedition this!  Jasper (always 
moving softly with no visible reason) contemplates the scene, and 
especially that stillest part of it which the Cathedral 
overshadows.  But he contemplates Durdles quite as curiously, and 
Durdles is by times conscious of his watchful eyes.

Only by times, because Durdles is growing drowsy.  As aeronauts 
lighten the load they carry, when they wish to rise, similarly 
Durdles has lightened the wicker bottle in coming up.  Snatches of 
sleep surprise him on his legs, and stop him in his talk.  A mild 
fit of calenture seizes him, in which he deems that the ground so 
far below, is on a level with the tower, and would as lief walk off 
the tower into the air as not.  Such is his state when they begin 
to come down.  And as aeronauts make themselves heavier when they 
wish to descend, similarly Durdles charges himself with more liquid 
from the wicker bottle, that he may come down the better.

The iron gate attained and locked - but not before Durdles has 
tumbled twice, and cut an eyebrow open once - they descend into the 
crypt again, with the intent of issuing forth as they entered.  
But, while returning among those lanes of light, Durdles becomes so 
very uncertain, both of foot and speech, that he half drops, half 
throws himself down, by one of the heavy pillars, scarcely less 
heavy than itself, and indistinctly appeals to his companion for 
forty winks of a second each.

'If you will have it so, or must have it so,' replies Jasper, 'I'll 
not leave you here.  Take them, while I walk to and fro.'

Durdles is asleep at once; and in his sleep he dreams a dream.

It is not much of a dream, considering the vast extent of the 
domains of dreamland, and their wonderful productions; it is only 
remarkable for being unusually restless and unusually real.  He 
dreams of lying there, asleep, and yet counting his companion's 
footsteps as he walks to and fro.  He dreams that the footsteps die 
away into distance of time and of space, and that something touches 
him, and that something falls from his hand.  Then something clinks 
and gropes about, and he dreams that he is alone for so long a 
time, that the lanes of light take new directions as the moon 
advances in her course.  From succeeding unconsciousness he passes 
into a dream of slow uneasiness from cold; and painfully awakes to 
a perception of the lanes of light - really changed, much as he had 
dreamed - and Jasper walking among them, beating his hands and 
feet.

'Holloa!' Durdles cries out, unmeaningly alarmed.

'Awake at last?' says Jasper, coming up to him.  'Do you know that 
your forties have stretched into thousands?'

'No.'

'They have though.'

'What's the time?'

'Hark!  The bells are going in the Tower!'

They strike four quarters, and then the great bell strikes.

'Two!' cries Durdles, scrambling up; 'why didn't you try to wake 
me, Mister Jarsper?'

'I did.  I might as well have tried to wake the dead - your own 
family of dead, up in the corner there.'

'Did you touch me?'

'Touch you!  Yes.  Shook you.'

As Durdles recalls that touching something in his dream, he looks 
down on the pavement, and sees the key of the crypt door lying 
close to where he himself lay.

'I dropped you, did I?' he says, picking it up, and recalling that 
part of his dream.  As he gathers himself up again into an upright 
position, or into a position as nearly upright as he ever 
maintains, he is again conscious of being watched by his companion.

'Well?' says Jasper, smiling, 'are you quite ready?  Pray don't 
hurry.'

'Let me get my bundle right, Mister Jarsper, and I'm with you.'  As 
he ties it afresh, he is once more conscious that he is very 
narrowly observed.

'What do you suspect me of, Mister Jarsper?' he asks, with drunken 
displeasure.  'Let them as has any suspicions of Durdles name 'em.'

'I've no suspicions of you, my good Mr. Durdles; but I have 
suspicions that my bottle was filled with something stiffer than 
either of us supposed.  And I also have suspicions,' Jasper adds, 
taking it from the pavement and turning it bottom upwards, 'that 
it's empty.'

Durdles condescends to laugh at this.  Continuing to chuckle when 
his laugh is over, as though remonstrant with himself on his 
drinking powers, he rolls to the door and unlocks it.  They both 
pass out, and Durdles relocks it, and pockets his key.

'A thousand thanks for a curious and interesting night,' says 
Jasper, giving him his hand; 'you can make your own way home?'

'I should think so!' answers Durdles.  'If you was to offer Durdles 
the affront to show him his way home, he wouldn't go home.

Durdles wouldn't go home till morning;
And THEN Durdles wouldn't go home,

Durdles wouldn't.'  This with the utmost defiance.

'Good-night, then.'

'Good-night, Mister Jarsper.'

Each is turning his own way, when a sharp whistle rends the 
silence, and the jargon is yelped out:

Widdy widdy wen!
I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - ten.
Widdy widdy wy!
Then - E - don't  - go - then - I - shy -
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!'

Instantly afterwards, a rapid fire of stones rattles at the 
Cathedral wall, and the hideous small boy is beheld opposite, 
dancing in the moonlight.

'What!  Is that baby-devil on the watch there!' cries Jasper in a 
fury:  so quickly roused, and so violent, that he seems an older 
devil himself.  'I shall shed the blood of that impish wretch!  I 
know I shall do it!'  Regardless of the fire, though it hits him 
more than once, he rushes at Deputy, collars him, and tries to 
bring him across.  But Deputy is not to be so easily brought 
across.  With a diabolical insight into the strongest part of his 
position, he is no sooner taken by the throat than he curls up his 
legs, forces his assailant to hang him, as it were, and gurgles in 
his throat, and screws his body, and twists, as already undergoing 
the first agonies of strangulation.  There is nothing for it but to 
drop him.  He instantly gets himself together, backs over to 
Durdles, and cries to his assailant, gnashing the great gap in 
front of his mouth with rage and malice:

'I'll blind yer, s'elp me!  I'll stone yer eyes out, s'elp me!  If 
I don't have yer eyesight, bellows me!'  At the same time dodging 
behind Durdles, and snarling at Jasper, now from this side of him, 
and now from that:  prepared, if pounced upon, to dart away in all 
manner of curvilinear directions, and, if run down after all, to 
grovel in the dust, and cry:  'Now, hit me when I'm down!  Do it!'

'Don't hurt the boy, Mister Jarsper,' urges Durdles, shielding him.  
'Recollect yourself.'

'He followed us to-night, when we first came here!'

'Yer lie, I didn't!' replies Deputy, in his one form of polite 
contradiction.

'He has been prowling near us ever since!'

'Yer lie, I haven't,' returns Deputy.  'I'd only jist come out for 
my 'elth when I see you two a-coming out of the Kin-freederel.  If

I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - ten!'

(with the usual rhythm and dance, though dodging behind Durdles), 
'it ain't ANY fault, is it?'

'Take him home, then,' retorts Jasper, ferociously, though with a 
strong check upon himself, 'and let my eyes be rid of the sight of 
you!'

Deputy, with another sharp whistle, at once expressing his relief, 
and his commencement of a milder stoning of Mr. Durdles, begins 
stoning that respectable gentleman home, as if he were a reluctant 
ox.  Mr. Jasper goes to his gatehouse, brooding.  And thus, as 
everything comes to an end, the unaccountable expedition comes to 
an end - for the time.

CHAPTER XIII - BOTH AT THEIR BEST

MISS TWINKLETON'S establishment was about to undergo a serene hush.  
The Christmas recess was at hand.  What had once, and at no remote 
period, been called, even by the erudite Miss Twinkleton herself, 
'the half;' but what was now called, as being more elegant, and 
more strictly collegiate, 'the term,' would expire to-morrow.  A 
noticeable relaxation of discipline had for some few days pervaded 
the Nuns' House.  Club suppers had occurred in the bedrooms, and a 
dressed tongue had been carved with a pair of scissors, and handed 
round with the curling tongs.  Portions of marmalade had likewise 
been distributed on a service of plates constructed of curlpaper; 
and cowslip wine had been quaffed from the small squat measuring 
glass in which little Rickitts (a junior of weakly constitution) 
took her steel drops daily.  The housemaids had been bribed with 
various fragments of riband, and sundry pairs of shoes more or less 
down at heel, to make no mention of crumbs in the beds; the airiest 
costumes had been worn on these festive occasions; and the daring 
Miss Ferdinand had even surprised the company with a sprightly solo 
on the comb-and-curlpaper, until suffocated in her own pillow by 
two flowing-haired executioners.

Nor were these the only tokens of dispersal.  Boxes appeared in the 
bedrooms (where they were capital at other times), and a surprising 
amount of packing took place, out of all proportion to the amount 
packed.  Largess, in the form of odds and ends of cold cream and 
pomatum, and also of hairpins, was freely distributed among the 
attendants.  On charges of inviolable secrecy, confidences were 
interchanged respecting golden youth of England expected to call, 
'at home,' on the first opportunity.  Miss Giggles (deficient in 
sentiment) did indeed profess that she, for her part, acknowledged 
such homage by making faces at the golden youth; but this young 
lady was outvoted by an immense majority.

On the last night before a recess, it was always expressly made a 
point of honour that nobody should go to sleep, and that Ghosts 
should be encouraged by all possible means.  This compact 
invariably broke down, and all the young ladies went to sleep very 
soon, and got up very early.

The concluding ceremony came off at twelve o'clock on the day of 
departure; when Miss Twinkleton, supported by Mrs. Tisher, held a 
drawing-room in her own apartment (the globes already covered with 
brown Holland), where glasses of white-wine and plates of cut 
pound-cake were discovered on the table.  Miss Twinkleton then 
said:  Ladies, another revolving year had brought us round to that 
festive period at which the first feelings of our nature bounded in 
our - Miss Twinkleton was annually going to add 'bosoms,' but 
annually stopped on the brink of that expression, and substituted 
'hearts.'  Hearts; our hearts.  Hem!  Again a revolving year, 
ladies, had brought us to a pause in our studies - let us hope our 
greatly advanced studies - and, like the mariner in his bark, the 
warrior in his tent, the captive in his dungeon, and the traveller 
in his various conveyances, we yearned for home.  Did we say, on 
such an occasion, in the opening words of Mr. Addison's impressive 
tragedy:

'The dawn is overcast, the morning lowers,
And heavily in clouds brings on the day,
The great, th' important day - ?'

Not so.  From horizon to zenith all was COULEUR DE ROSE, for all 
was redolent of our relations and friends.  Might WE find THEM 
prospering as WE expected; might THEY find US prospering as THEY 
expected!  Ladies, we would now, with our love to one another, wish 
one another good-bye, and happiness, until we met again.  And when 
the time should come for our resumption of those pursuits which 
(here a general depression set in all round), pursuits which, 
pursuits which; - then let us ever remember what was said by the 
Spartan General, in words too trite for repetition, at the battle 
it were superfluous to specify.

The handmaidens of the establishment, in their best caps, then 
handed the trays, and the young ladies sipped and crumbled, and the 
bespoken coaches began to choke the street.  Then leave-taking was 
not long about; and Miss Twinkleton, in saluting each young lady's 
cheek, confided to her an exceedingly neat letter, addressed to her 
next friend at law, 'with Miss Twinkleton's best compliments' in 
the corner.  This missive she handed with an air as if it had not 
the least connexion with the bill, but were something in the nature 
of a delicate and joyful surprise.

So many times had Rosa seen such dispersals, and so very little did 
she know of any other Home, that she was contented to remain where 
she was, and was even better contented than ever before, having her 
latest friend with her.  And yet her latest friendship had a blank 
place in it of which she could not fail to be sensible.  Helena 
Landless, having been a party to her brother's revelation about 
Rosa, and having entered into that compact of silence with Mr. 
Crisparkle, shrank from any allusion to Edwin Drood's name.  Why 
she so avoided it, was mysterious to Rosa, but she perfectly 
perceived the fact.  But for the fact, she might have relieved her 
own little perplexed heart of some of its doubts and hesitations, 
by taking Helena into her confidence.  As it was, she had no such 
vent:  she could only ponder on her own difficulties, and wonder 
more and more why this avoidance of Edwin's name should last, now 
that she knew - for so much Helena had told her - that a good 
understanding was to be reestablished between the two young men, 
when Edwin came down.

It would have made a pretty picture, so many pretty girls kissing 
Rosa in the cold porch of the Nuns' House, and that sunny little 
creature peeping out of it (unconscious of sly faces carved on 
spout and gable peeping at her), and waving farewells to the 
departing coaches, as if she represented the spirit of rosy youth 
abiding in the place to keep it bright and warm in its desertion.  
The hoarse High Street became musical with the cry, in various 
silvery voices, 'Good-bye, Rosebud darling!' and the effigy of Mr. 
Sapsea's father over the opposite doorway seemed to say to mankind:  
'Gentlemen, favour me with your attention to this charming little 
last lot left behind, and bid with a spirit worthy of the 
occasion!'  Then the staid street, so unwontedly sparkling, 
youthful, and fresh for a few rippling moments, ran dry, and 
Cloisterham was itself again.

If Rosebud in her bower now waited Edwin Drood's coming with an 
uneasy heart, Edwin for his part was uneasy too.  With far less 
force of purpose in his composition than the childish beauty, 
crowned by acclamation fairy queen of Miss Twinkleton's 
establishment, he had a conscience, and Mr. Grewgious had pricked 
it.  That gentleman's steady convictions of what was right and what 
was wrong in such a case as his, were neither to be frowned aside 
nor laughed aside.  They would not be moved.  But for the dinner in 
Staple Inn, and but for the ring he carried in the breast pocket of 
his coat, he would have drifted into their wedding-day without 
another pause for real thought, loosely trusting that all would go 
well, left alone.  But that serious putting him on his truth to the 
living and the dead had brought him to a check.  He must either 
give the ring to Rosa, or he must take it back.  Once put into this 
narrowed way of action, it was curious that he began to consider 
Rosa's claims upon him more unselfishly than he had ever considered 
them before, and began to be less sure of himself than he had ever 
been in all his easy-going days.

'I will be guided by what she says, and by how we get on,' was his 
decision, walking from the gatehouse to the Nuns' House.  'Whatever 
comes of it, I will bear his words in mind, and try to be true to 
the living and the dead.'

Rosa was dressed for walking.  She expected him.  It was a bright, 
frosty day, and Miss Twinkleton had already graciously sanctioned 
fresh air.  Thus they got out together before it became necessary 
for either Miss Twinkleton, or the deputy high-priest Mrs. Tisher, 
to lay even so much as one of those usual offerings on the shrine 
of Propriety.

'My dear Eddy,' said Rosa, when they had turned out of the High 
Street, and had got among the quiet walks in the neighbourhood of 
the Cathedral and the river:  'I want to say something very serious 
to you.  I have been thinking about it for a long, long time.'

'I want to be serious with you too, Rosa dear.  I mean to be 
serious and earnest.'

'Thank you, Eddy.  And you will not think me unkind because I 
begin, will you?  You will not think I speak for myself only, 
because I speak first?  That would not be generous, would it?  And 
I know you are generous!'

He said, 'I hope I am not ungenerous to you, Rosa.'  He called her 
Pussy no more.  Never again.

'And there is no fear,' pursued Rosa, 'of our quarrelling, is 
there?  Because, Eddy,' clasping her hand on his arm, 'we have so 
much reason to be very lenient to each other!'

'We will be, Rosa.'

'That's a dear good boy!  Eddy, let us be courageous.  Let us 
change to brother and sister from this day forth.'

'Never be husband and wife?'

'Never!'

Neither spoke again for a little while.  But after that pause he 
said, with some effort:

'Of course I know that this has been in both our minds, Rosa, and 
of course I am in honour bound to confess freely that it does not 
originate with you.'

'No, nor with you, dear,' she returned, with pathetic earnestness.  
'That sprung up between us.  You are not truly happy in our 
engagement; I am not truly happy in it.  O, I am so sorry, so 
sorry!'  And there she broke into tears.

'I am deeply sorry too, Rosa.  Deeply sorry for you.'

'And I for you, poor boy!  And I for you!'

This pure young feeling, this gentle and forbearing feeling of each 
towards the other, brought with it its reward in a softening light 
that seemed to shine on their position.  The relations between them 
did not look wilful, or capricious, or a failure, in such a light; 
they became elevated into something more self-denying, honourable, 
affectionate, and true.

'If we knew yesterday,' said Rosa, as she dried her eyes, 'and we 
did know yesterday, and on many, many yesterdays, that we were far 
from right together in those relations which were not of our own 
choosing, what better could we do to-day than change them?  It is 
natural that we should be sorry, and you see how sorry we both are; 
but how much better to be sorry now than then!'

'When, Rosa?'

'When it would be too late.  And then we should be angry, besides.'

Another silence fell upon them.

'And you know,' said Rosa innocently, 'you couldn't like me then; 
and you can always like me now, for I shall not be a drag upon you, 
or a worry to you.  And I can always like you now, and your sister 
will not tease or trifle with you.  I often did when I was not your 
sister, and I beg your pardon for it.'

'Don't let us come to that, Rosa; or I shall want more pardoning 
than I like to think of.'

'No, indeed, Eddy; you are too hard, my generous boy, upon 
yourself.  Let us sit down, brother, on these ruins, and let me 
tell you how it was with us.  I think I know, for I have considered 
about it very much since you were here last time.  You liked me, 
didn't you?  You thought I was a nice little thing?'

'Everybody thinks that, Rosa.'

'Do they?'  She knitted her brow musingly for a moment, and then 
flashed out with the bright little induction:  'Well, but say they 
do.  Surely it was not enough that you should think of me only as 
other people did; now, was it?'

The point was not to be got over.  It was not enough.

'And that is just what I mean; that is just how it was with us,' 
said Rosa.  'You liked me very well, and you had grown used to me, 
and had grown used to the idea of our being married.  You accepted 
the situation as an inevitable kind of thing, didn't you?  It was 
to be, you thought, and why discuss or dispute it?'

It was new and strange to him to have himself presented to himself 
so clearly, in a glass of her holding up.  He had always patronised 
her, in his superiority to her share of woman's wit.  Was that but 
another instance of something radically amiss in the terms on which 
they had been gliding towards a life-long bondage?

'All this that I say of you is true of me as well, Eddy.  Unless it 
was, I might not be bold enough to say it.  Only, the difference 
between us was, that by little and little there crept into my mind 
a habit of thinking about it, instead of dismissing it.  My life is 
not so busy as yours, you see, and I have not so many things to 
think of.  So I thought about it very much, and I cried about it 
very much too (though that was not your fault, poor boy); when all 
at once my guardian came down, to prepare for my leaving the Nuns' 
House.  I tried to hint to him that I was not quite settled in my 
mind, but I hesitated and failed, and he didn't understand me. But 
he is a good, good man.  And he put before me so kindly, and yet so 
strongly, how seriously we ought to consider, in our circumstances, 
that I resolved to speak to you the next moment we were alone and 
grave.  And if I seemed to come to it easily just now, because I 
came to it all at once, don't think it was so really, Eddy, for O, 
it was very, very hard, and O, I am very, very sorry!'

Her full heart broke into tears again.  He put his arm about her 
waist, and they walked by the river-side together.

'Your guardian has spoken to me too, Rosa dear.  I saw him before I 
left London.'  His right hand was in his breast, seeking the ring; 
but he checked it, as he thought:  'If I am to take it back, why 
should I tell her of it?'

'And that made you more serious about it, didn't it, Eddy?  And if 
I had not spoken to you, as I have, you would have spoken to me?  I 
hope you can tell me so?  I don't like it to be ALL my doing, 
though it IS so much better for us.'

'Yes, I should have spoken; I should have put everything before 
you; I came intending to do it.  But I never could have spoken to 
you as you have spoken to me, Rosa.'

'Don't say you mean so coldly or unkindly, Eddy, please, if you can 
help it.'

'I mean so sensibly and delicately, so wisely and affectionately.'

'That's my dear brother!'  She kissed his hand in a little rapture.  
'The dear girls will be dreadfully disappointed,' added Rosa, 
laughing, with the dewdrops glistening in her bright eyes.  'They 
have looked forward to it so, poor pets!'

'Ah! but I fear it will be a worse disappointment to Jack,' said 
Edwin Drood, with a start.  'I never thought of Jack!'

Her swift and intent look at him as he said the words could no more 
be recalled than a flash of lightning can.  But it appeared as 
though she would have instantly recalled it, if she could; for she 
looked down, confused, and breathed quickly.

'You don't doubt its being a blow to Jack, Rosa?'

She merely replied, and that evasively and hurriedly:  Why should 
she?  She had not thought about it.  He seemed, to her, to have so 
little to do with it.

'My dear child! can you suppose that any one so wrapped up in 
another - Mrs. Tope's expression:  not mine - as Jack is in me, 
could fail to be struck all of a heap by such a sudden and complete 
change in my life?  I say sudden, because it will be sudden to HIM, 
you know.'

She nodded twice or thrice, and her lips parted as if she would 
have assented.  But she uttered no sound, and her breathing was no 
slower.

'How shall I tell Jack?' said Edwin, ruminating.  If he had been 
less occupied with the thought, he must have seen her singular 
emotion.  'I never thought of Jack.  It must be broken to him, 
before the town-crier knows it.  I dine with the dear fellow to-
morrow and next day - Christmas Eve and Christmas Day - but it 
would never do to spoil his feast-days.  He always worries about 
me, and moddley-coddleys in the merest trifles.  The news is sure 
to overset him.  How on earth shall this be broken to Jack?'

'He must be told, I suppose?' said Rosa.

'My dear Rosa! who ought to be in our confidence, if not Jack?'

'My guardian promised to come down, if I should write and ask him.  
I am going to do so.  Would you like to leave it to him?'

'A bright idea!' cried Edwin.  'The other trustee.  Nothing more 
natural.  He comes down, he goes to Jack, he relates what we have 
agreed upon, and he states our case better than we could.  He has 
already spoken feelingly to you, he has already spoken feelingly to 
me, and he'll put the whole thing feelingly to Jack.  That's it!  I 
am not a coward, Rosa, but to tell you a secret, I am a little 
afraid of Jack.'

'No, no! you are not afraid of him!' cried Rosa, turning white, and 
clasping her hands.

'Why, sister Rosa, sister Rosa, what do you see from the turret?' 
said Edwin, rallying her.  'My dear girl!'

'You frightened me.'

'Most unintentionally, but I am as sorry as if I had meant to do 
it.  Could you possibly suppose for a moment, from any loose way of 
speaking of mine, that I was literally afraid of the dear fond 
fellow?  What I mean is, that he is subject to a kind of paroxysm, 
or fit - I saw him in it once - and I don't know but that so great 
a surprise, coming upon him direct from me whom he is so wrapped up 
in, might bring it on perhaps.  Which - and this is the secret I 
was going to tell you - is another reason for your guardian's 
making the communication.  He is so steady, precise, and exact, 
that he will talk Jack's thoughts into shape, in no time:  whereas 
with me Jack is always impulsive and hurried, and, I may say, 
almost womanish.'

Rosa seemed convinced.  Perhaps from her own very different point 
of view of 'Jack,' she felt comforted and protected by the 
interposition of Mr. Grewgious between herself and him.

And now, Edwin Drood's right hand closed again upon the ring in its 
little case, and again was checked by the consideration:  'It is 
certain, now, that I am to give it back to him; then why should I 
tell her of it?'  That pretty sympathetic nature which could be so 
sorry for him in the blight of their childish hopes of happiness 
together, and could so quietly find itself alone in a new world to 
weave fresh wreaths of such flowers as it might prove to bear, the 
old world's flowers being withered, would be grieved by those 
sorrowful jewels; and to what purpose?  Why should it be?  They 
were but a sign of broken joys and baseless projects; in their very 
beauty they were (as the unlikeliest of men had said) almost a 
cruel satire on the loves, hopes, plans, of humanity, which are 
able to forecast nothing, and are so much brittle dust.  Let them 
be.  He would restore them to her guardian when he came down; he in 
his turn would restore them to the cabinet from which he had 
unwillingly taken them; and there, like old letters or old vows, or 
other records of old aspirations come to nothing, they would be 
disregarded, until, being valuable, they were sold into circulation 
again, to repeat their former round.

Let them be.  Let them lie unspoken of, in his breast.  However 
distinctly or indistinctly he entertained these thoughts, he 
arrived at the conclusion, Let them be.  Among the mighty store of 
wonderful chains that are for ever forging, day and night, in the 
vast iron-works of time and circumstance, there was one chain 
forged in the moment of that small conclusion, riveted to the 
foundations of heaven and earth, and gifted with invincible force 
to hold and drag.

They walked on by the river.  They began to speak of their separate 
plans.  He would quicken his departure from England, and she would 
remain where she was, at least as long as Helena remained.  The 
poor dear girls should have their disappointment broken to them 
gently, and, as the first preliminary, Miss Twinkleton should be 
confided in by Rosa, even in advance of the reappearance of Mr. 
Grewgious.  It should be made clear in all quarters that she and 
Edwin were the best of friends.  There had never been so serene an 
understanding between them since they were first affianced.  And 
yet there was one reservation on each side; on hers, that she 
intended through her guardian to withdraw herself immediately from 
the tuition of her music-master; on his, that he did already 
entertain some wandering speculations whether it might ever come to 
pass that he would know more of Miss Landless.

The bright, frosty day declined as they walked and spoke together.  
The sun dipped in the river far behind them, and the old city lay 
red before them, as their walk drew to a close.  The moaning water 
cast its seaweed duskily at their feet, when they turned to leave 
its margin; and the rooks hovered above them with hoarse cries, 
darker splashes in the darkening air.

'I will prepare Jack for my flitting soon,' said Edwin, in a low 
voice, 'and I will but see your guardian when he comes, and then go 
before they speak together.  It will be better done without my 
being by.  Don't you think so?'

'Yes.'

'We know we have done right, Rosa?'

'Yes.'

'We know we are better so, even now?'

'And shall be far, far better so by-and-by.'

Still there was that lingering tenderness in their hearts towards 
the old positions they were relinquishing, that they prolonged 
their parting.  When they came among the elm-trees by the 
Cathedral, where they had last sat together, they stopped as by 
consent, and Rosa raised her face to his, as she had never raised 
it in the old days; - for they were old already.

'God bless you, dear!  Good-bye!'

'God bless you, dear!  Good-bye!'

They kissed each other fervently.

'Now, please take me home, Eddy, and let me be by myself.'

'Don't look round, Rosa,' he cautioned her, as he drew her arm 
through his, and led her away.  'Didn't you see Jack?'

'No!  Where?'

'Under the trees.  He saw us, as we took leave of each other.  Poor 
fellow! he little thinks we have parted.  This will be a blow to 
him, I am much afraid!'

She hurried on, without resting, and hurried on until they had 
passed under the gatehouse into the street; once there, she asked:

'Has he followed us?  You can look without seeming to.  Is he 
behind?'

'No. Yes, he is!  He has just passed out under the gateway.  The 
dear, sympathetic old fellow likes to keep us in sight.  I am 
afraid he will be bitterly disappointed!'

She pulled hurriedly at the handle of the hoarse old bell, and the 
gate soon opened.  Before going in, she gave him one last, wide, 
wondering look, as if she would have asked him with imploring 
emphasis:  'O! don't you understand?'  And out of that look he 
vanished from her view.

CHAPTER XIV - WHEN SHALL THESE THREE MEET AGAIN?

CHRISTMAS EVE in Cloisterham.  A few strange faces in the streets; 
a few other faces, half strange and half familiar, once the faces 
of Cloisterham children, now the faces of men and women who come 
back from the outer world at long intervals to find the city 
wonderfully shrunken in size, as if it had not washed by any means 
well in the meanwhile.  To these, the striking of the Cathedral 
clock, and the cawing of the rooks from the Cathedral tower, are 
like voices of their nursery time.  To such as these, it has 
happened in their dying hours afar off, that they have imagined 
their chamber-floor to be strewn with the autumnal leaves fallen 
from the elm-trees in the Close:  so have the rustling sounds and 
fresh scents of their earliest impressions revived when the circle 
of their lives was very nearly traced, and the beginning and the 
end were drawing close together.

Seasonable tokens are about.  Red berries shine here and there in 
the lattices of Minor Canon Corner; Mr. and Mrs. Tope are daintily 
sticking sprigs of holly into the carvings and sconces of the 
Cathedral stalls, as if they were sticking them into the coat-
button-holes of the Dean and Chapter.  Lavish profusion is in the 
shops:  particularly in the articles of currants, raisins, spices, 
candied peel, and moist sugar.  An unusual air of gallantry and 
dissipation is abroad; evinced in an immense bunch of mistletoe 
hanging in the greengrocer's shop doorway, and a poor little 
Twelfth Cake, culminating in the figure of a Harlequin - such a 
very poor little Twelfth Cake, that one would rather called it a 
Twenty-fourth Cake or a Forty-eighth Cake - to be raffled for at 
the pastrycook's, terms one shilling per member.  Public amusements 
are not wanting.  The Wax-Work which made so deep an impression on 
the reflective mind of the Emperor of China is to be seen by 
particular desire during Christmas Week only, on the premises of 
the bankrupt livery-stable-keeper up the lane; and a new grand 
comic Christmas pantomime is to be produced at the Theatre:  the 
latter heralded by the portrait of Signor Jacksonini the clown, 
saying 'How do you do to-morrow?' quite as large as life, and 
almost as miserably.  In short, Cloisterham is up and doing:  
though from this description the High School and Miss Twinkleton's 
are to be excluded.  From the former establishment the scholars 
have gone home, every one of them in love with one of Miss 
Twinkleton's young ladies (who knows nothing about it); and only 
the handmaidens flutter occasionally in the windows of the latter.  
It is noticed, by the bye, that these damsels become, within the 
limits of decorum, more skittish when thus intrusted with the 
concrete representation of their sex, than when dividing the 
representation with Miss Twinkleton's young ladies.

Three are to meet at the gatehouse to-night.  How does each one of 
the three get through the day?

Neville Landless, though absolved from his books for the time by 
Mr. Crisparkle - whose fresh nature is by no means insensible to 
the charms of a holiday - reads and writes in his quiet room, with 
a concentrated air, until it is two hours past noon.  He then sets 
himself to clearing his table, to arranging his books, and to 
tearing up and burning his stray papers.  He makes a clean sweep of 
all untidy accumulations, puts all his drawers in order, and leaves 
no note or scrap of paper undestroyed, save such memoranda as bear 
directly on his studies.  This done, he turns to his wardrobe, 
selects a few articles of ordinary wear - among them, change of 
stout shoes and socks for walking - and packs these in a knapsack.  
This knapsack is new, and he bought it in the High Street 
yesterday.  He also purchased, at the same time and at the same 
place, a heavy walking-stick; strong in the handle for the grip of 
the hand, and iron-shod.  He tries this, swings it, poises it, and 
lays it by, with the knapsack, on a window-seat.  By this time his 
arrangements are complete.

He dresses for going out, and is in the act of going - indeed has 
left his room, and has met the Minor Canon on the staircase, coming 
out of his bedroom upon the same story - when he turns back again 
for his walking-stick, thinking he will carry it now.  Mr. 
Crisparkle, who has paused on the staircase, sees it in his hand on 
his immediately reappearing, takes it from him, and asks him with a 
smile how he chooses a stick?

'Really I don't know that I understand the subject,' he answers.  
'I chose it for its weight.'

'Much too heavy, Neville; MUCH too heavy.'

'To rest upon in a long walk, sir?'

'Rest upon?' repeats Mr. Crisparkle, throwing himself into 
pedestrian form.  'You don't rest upon it; you merely balance with 
it.'

'I shall know better, with practice, sir.  I have not lived in a 
walking country, you know.'

'True,' says Mr. Crisparkle.  'Get into a little training, and we 
will have a few score miles together.  I should leave you nowhere 
now.  Do you come back before dinner?'

'I think not, as we dine early.'

Mr. Crisparkle gives him a bright nod and a cheerful good-bye; 
expressing (not without intention) absolute confidence and ease

Neville repairs to the Nuns' House, and requests that Miss Landless 
may be informed that her brother is there, by appointment.  He 
waits at the gate, not even crossing the threshold; for he is on 
his parole not to put himself in Rosa's way.

His sister is at least as mindful of the obligation they have taken 
on themselves as he can be, and loses not a moment in joining him.  
They meet affectionately, avoid lingering there, and walk towards 
the upper inland country.

'I am not going to tread upon forbidden ground, Helena,' says 
Neville, when they have walked some distance and are turning; 'you 
will understand in another moment that I cannot help referring to - 
what shall I say? - my infatuation.'

'Had you not better avoid it, Neville?  You know that I can hear 
nothing.'

'You can hear, my dear, what Mr. Crisparkle has heard, and heard 
with approval.'

'Yes; I can hear so much.'

'Well, it is this.  I am not only unsettled and unhappy myself, but 
I am conscious of unsettling and interfering with other people.  
How do I know that, but for my unfortunate presence, you, and - and 
- the rest of that former party, our engaging guardian excepted, 
might be dining cheerfully in Minor Canon Corner to-morrow?  Indeed 
it probably would be so.  I can see too well that I am not high in 
the old lady's opinion, and it is easy to understand what an 
irksome clog I must be upon the hospitalities of her orderly house 
- especially at this time of year - when I must be kept asunder 
from this person, and there is such a reason for my not being 
brought into contact with that person, and an unfavourable 
reputation has preceded me with such another person; and so on.  I 
have put this very gently to Mr. Crisparkle, for you know his self-
denying ways; but still I have put it.  What I have laid much 
greater stress upon at the same time is, that I am engaged in a 
miserable struggle with myself, and that a little change and 
absence may enable me to come through it the better.  So, the 
weather being bright and hard, I am going on a walking expedition, 
and intend taking myself out of everybody's way (my own included, I 
hope) to-morrow morning.'

'When to come back?'

'In a fortnight.'

'And going quite alone?'

'I am much better without company, even if there were any one but 
you to bear me company, my dear Helena.'

'Mr. Crisparkle entirely agrees, you say?'

'Entirely.  I am not sure but that at first he was inclined to 
think it rather a moody scheme, and one that might do a brooding 
mind harm.  But we took a moonlight walk last Monday night, to talk 
it over at leisure, and I represented the case to him as it really 
is.  I showed him that I do want to conquer myself, and that, this 
evening well got over, it is surely better that I should be away 
from here just now, than here.  I could hardly help meeting certain 
people walking together here, and that could do no good, and is 
certainly not the way to forget.  A fortnight hence, that chance 
will probably be over, for the time; and when it again arises for 
the last time, why, I can again go away.  Farther, I really do feel 
hopeful of bracing exercise and wholesome fatigue.  You know that 
Mr. Crisparkle allows such things their full weight in the 
preservation of his own sound mind in his own sound body, and that 
his just spirit is not likely to maintain one set of natural laws 
for himself and another for me.  He yielded to my view of the 
matter, when convinced that I was honestly in earnest; and so, with 
his full consent, I start to-morrow morning.  Early enough to be 
not only out of the streets, but out of hearing of the bells, when 
the good people go to church.'

Helena thinks it over, and thinks well of it.  Mr. Crisparkle doing 
so, she would do so; but she does originally, out of her own mind, 
think well of it, as a healthy project, denoting a sincere 
endeavour and an active attempt at self-correction.  She is 
inclined to pity him, poor fellow, for going away solitary on the 
great Christmas festival; but she feels it much more to the purpose 
to encourage him.  And she does encourage him.

He will write to her?

He will write to her every alternate day, and tell her all his 
adventures.

Does he send clothes on in advance of him?

'My dear Helena, no.  Travel like a pilgrim, with wallet and staff.  
My wallet - or my knapsack - is packed, and ready for strapping on; 
and here is my staff!'

He hands it to her; she makes the same remark as Mr. Crisparkle, 
that it is very heavy; and gives it back to him, asking what wood 
it is?  Iron-wood.

Up to this point he has been extremely cheerful.  Perhaps, the 
having to carry his case with her, and therefore to present it in 
its brightest aspect, has roused his spirits.  Perhaps, the having 
done so with success, is followed by a revulsion.  As the day 
closes in, and the city-lights begin to spring up before them, he 
grows depressed.

'I wish I were not going to this dinner, Helena.'

'Dear Neville, is it worth while to care much about it?  Think how 
soon it will be over.'

'How soon it will be over!' he repeats gloomily.  'Yes.  But I 
don't like it.'

There may be a moment's awkwardness, she cheeringly represents to 
him, but it can only last a moment.  He is quite sure of himself.

'I wish I felt as sure of everything else, as I feel of myself,' he 
answers her.

'How strangely you speak, dear!  What do you mean?'

'Helena, I don't know.  I only know that I don't like it.  What a 
strange dead weight there is in the air!'

She calls his attention to those copperous clouds beyond the river, 
and says that the wind is rising.  He scarcely speaks again, until 
he takes leave of her, at the gate of the Nuns' House.  She does 
not immediately enter, when they have parted, but remains looking 
after him along the street.  Twice he passes the gatehouse, 
reluctant to enter.  At length, the Cathedral clock chiming one 
quarter, with a rapid turn he hurries in.

And so HE goes up the postern stair.

Edwin Drood passes a solitary day.  Something of deeper moment than 
he had thought, has gone out of his life; and in the silence of his 
own chamber he wept for it last night.  Though the image of Miss 
Landless still hovers in the background of his mind, the pretty 
little affectionate creature, so much firmer and wiser than he had 
supposed, occupies its stronghold.  It is with some misgiving of 
his own unworthiness that he thinks of her, and of what they might 
have been to one another, if he had been more in earnest some time 
ago; if he had set a higher value on her; if, instead of accepting 
his lot in life as an inheritance of course, he had studied the 
right way to its appreciation and enhancement.  And still, for all 
this, and though there is a sharp heartache in all this, the vanity 
and caprice of youth sustain that handsome figure of Miss Landless 
in the background of his mind.

That was a curious look of Rosa's when they parted at the gate.  
Did it mean that she saw below the surface of his thoughts, and 
down into their twilight depths?  Scarcely that, for it was a look 
of astonished and keen inquiry.  He decides that he cannot 
understand it, though it was remarkably expressive.

As he only waits for Mr. Grewgious now, and will depart immediately 
after having seen him, he takes a sauntering leave of the ancient 
city and its neighbourhood.  He recalls the time when Rosa and he 
walked here or there, mere children, full of the dignity of being 
engaged.  Poor children! he thinks, with a pitying sadness.

Finding that his watch has stopped, he turns into the jeweller's 
shop, to have it wound and set.  The jeweller is knowing on the 
subject of a bracelet, which he begs leave to submit, in a general 
and quite aimless way.  It would suit (he considers) a young bride, 
to perfection; especially if of a rather diminutive style of 
beauty.  Finding the bracelet but coldly looked at, the jeweller 
invites attention to a tray of rings for gentlemen; here is a style 
of ring, now, he remarks - a very chaste signet - which gentlemen 
are much given to purchasing, when changing their condition.  A 
ring of a very responsible appearance.  With the date of their 
wedding-day engraved inside, several gentlemen have preferred it to 
any other kind of memento.

The rings are as coldly viewed as the bracelet.  Edwin tells the 
tempter that he wears no jewellery but his watch and chain, which 
were his father's; and his shirt-pin.

'That I was aware of,' is the jeweller's reply, 'for Mr. Jasper 
dropped in for a watch-glass the other day, and, in fact, I showed 
these articles to him, remarking that if he SHOULD wish to make a 
present to a gentleman relative, on any particular occasion - But 
he said with a smile that he had an inventory in his mind of all 
the jewellery his gentleman relative ever wore; namely, his watch 
and chain, and his shirt-pin.'  Still (the jeweller considers) that 
might not apply to all times, though applying to the present time.  
'Twenty minutes past two, Mr. Drood, I set your watch at.  Let me 
recommend you not to let it run down, sir.'

Edwin takes his watch, puts it on, and goes out, thinking:  'Dear 
old Jack!  If I were to make an extra crease in my neckcloth, he 
would think it worth noticing!'

He strolls about and about, to pass the time until the dinner-hour.  
It somehow happens that Cloisterham seems reproachful to him to-
day; has fault to find with him, as if he had not used it well; but 
is far more pensive with him than angry.  His wonted carelessness 
is replaced by a wistful looking at, and dwelling upon, all the old 
landmarks.  He will soon be far away, and may never see them again, 
he thinks.  Poor youth!  Poor youth!

As dusk draws on, he paces the Monks' Vineyard.  He has walked to 
and fro, full half an hour by the Cathedral chimes, and it has 
closed in dark, before he becomes quite aware of a woman crouching 
on the ground near a wicket gate in a corner.  The gate commands a 
cross bye-path, little used in the gloaming; and the figure must 
have been there all the time, though he has but gradually and 
lately made it out.

He strikes into that path, and walks up to the wicket.  By the 
light of a lamp near it, he sees that the woman is of a haggard 
appearance, and that her weazen chin is resting on her hands, and 
that her eyes are staring - with an unwinking, blind sort of 
steadfastness - before her.

Always kindly, but moved to be unusually kind this evening, and 
having bestowed kind words on most of the children and aged people 
he has met, he at once bends down, and speaks to this woman.

'Are you ill?'

'No, deary,' she answers, without looking at him, and with no 
departure from her strange blind stare.

'Are you blind?'

'No, deary.'

'Are you lost, homeless, faint?  What is the matter, that you stay 
here in the cold so long, without moving?'

By slow and stiff efforts, she appears to contract her vision until 
it can rest upon him; and then a curious film passes over her, and 
she begins to shake.

He straightens himself, recoils a step, and looks down at her in a 
dread amazement; for he seems to know her.

'Good Heaven!' he thinks, next moment.  'Like Jack that night!'

As he looks down at her, she looks up at him, and whimpers:  'My 
lungs is weakly; my lungs is dreffle bad.  Poor me, poor me, my 
cough is rattling dry!' and coughs in confirmation horribly.

'Where do you come from?'

'Come from London, deary.'  (Her cough still rending her.)

'Where are you going to?'

'Back to London, deary.  I came here, looking for a needle in a 
haystack, and I ain't found it.  Look'ee, deary; give me three-and-
sixpence, and don't you be afeard for me.  I'll get back to London 
then, and trouble no one.  I'm in a business. - Ah, me!  It's 
slack, it's slack, and times is very bad! - but I can make a shift 
to live by it.'

'Do you eat opium?'

'Smokes it,' she replies with difficulty, still racked by her 
cough.  'Give me three-and-sixpence, and I'll lay it out well, and 
get back.  If you don't give me three-and-sixpence, don't give me a 
brass farden.  And if you do give me three-and-sixpence, deary, 
I'll tell you something.'

He counts the money from his pocket, and puts it in her hand.  She 
instantly clutches it tight, and rises to her feet with a croaking 
laugh of satisfaction.

'Bless ye!  Hark'ee, dear genl'mn.  What's your Chris'en name?'

'Edwin.'

'Edwin, Edwin, Edwin,' she repeats, trailing off into a drowsy 
repetition of the word; and then asks suddenly:  'Is the short of 
that name Eddy?'

'It is sometimes called so,' he replies, with the colour starting 
to his face.

'Don't sweethearts call it so?' she asks, pondering.

'How should I know?'

'Haven't you a sweetheart, upon your soul?'

'None.'

She is moving away, with another 'Bless ye, and thank'ee, deary!' 
when he adds:  'You were to tell me something; you may as well do 
so.'

'So I was, so I was.  Well, then.  Whisper.  You be thankful that 
your name ain't Ned.'

He looks at her quite steadily, as he asks:  'Why?'

'Because it's a bad name to have just now.'

'How a bad name?'

'A threatened name.  A dangerous name.'

'The proverb says that threatened men live long,' he tells her, 
lightly.

'Then Ned - so threatened is he, wherever he may be while I am a-
talking to you, deary - should live to all eternity!' replies the 
woman.

She has leaned forward to say it in his ear, with her forefinger 
shaking before his eyes, and now huddles herself together, and with 
another 'Bless ye, and thank'ee!' goes away in the direction of the 
Travellers' Lodging House.

This is not an inspiriting close to a dull day.  Alone, in a 
sequestered place, surrounded by vestiges of old time and decay, it 
rather has a tendency to call a shudder into being.  He makes for 
the better-lighted streets, and resolves as he walks on to say 
nothing of this to-night, but to mention it to Jack (who alone 
calls him Ned), as an odd coincidence, to-morrow; of course only as 
a coincidence, and not as anything better worth remembering.

Still, it holds to him, as many things much better worth 
remembering never did.  He has another mile or so, to linger out 
before the dinner-hour; and, when he walks over the bridge and by 
the river, the woman's words are in the rising wind, in the angry 
sky, in the troubled water, in the flickering lights.  There is 
some solemn echo of them even in the Cathedral chime, which strikes 
a sudden surprise to his heart as he turns in under the archway of 
the gatehouse.

And so HE goes up the postern stair.

John Jasper passes a more agreeable and cheerful day than either of 
his guests.  Having no music-lessons to give in the holiday season, 
his time is his own, but for the Cathedral services.  He is early 
among the shopkeepers, ordering little table luxuries that his 
nephew likes.  His nephew will not be with him long, he tells his 
provision-dealers, and so must be petted and made much of.  While 
out on his hospitable preparations, he looks in on Mr. Sapsea; and 
mentions that dear Ned, and that inflammable young spark of Mr. 
Crisparkle's, are to dine at the gatehouse to-day, and make up 
their difference.  Mr. Sapsea is by no means friendly towards the 
inflammable young spark.  He says that his complexion is 'Un-
English.'  And when Mr. Sapsea has once declared anything to be Un-
English, he considers that thing everlastingly sunk in the 
bottomless pit.

John Jasper is truly sorry to hear Mr. Sapsea speak thus, for he 
knows right well that Mr. Sapsea never speaks without a meaning, 
and that he has a subtle trick of being right.  Mr. Sapsea (by a 
very remarkable coincidence) is of exactly that opinion.

Mr. Jasper is in beautiful voice this day.  In the pathetic 
supplication to have his heart inclined to keep this law, he quite 
astonishes his fellows by his melodious power.  He has never sung 
difficult music with such skill and harmony, as in this day's 
Anthem.  His nervous temperament is occasionally prone to take 
difficult music a little too quickly; to-day, his time is perfect.

These results are probably attained through a grand composure of 
the spirits.  The mere mechanism of his throat is a little tender, 
for he wears, both with his singing-robe and with his ordinary 
dress, a large black scarf of strong close-woven silk, slung 
loosely round his neck.  But his composure is so noticeable, that 
Mr. Crisparkle speaks of it as they come out from Vespers.

'I must thank you, Jasper, for the pleasure with which I have heard 
you to-day.  Beautiful!  Delightful!  You could not have so outdone 
yourself, I hope, without being wonderfully well.'

'I AM wonderfully well.'

'Nothing unequal,' says the Minor Canon, with a smooth motion of 
his hand:  'nothing unsteady, nothing forced, nothing avoided; all 
thoroughly done in a masterly manner, with perfect self-command.'

'Thank you.  I hope so, if it is not too much to say.'

'One would think, Jasper, you had been trying a new medicine for 
that occasional indisposition of yours.'

'No, really?  That's well observed; for I have.'

'Then stick to it, my good fellow,' says Mr. Crisparkle, clapping 
him on the shoulder with friendly encouragement, 'stick to it.'

'I will.'

'I congratulate you,' Mr. Crisparkle pursues, as they come out of 
the Cathedral, 'on all accounts.'

'Thank you again.  I will walk round to the Corner with you, if you 
don't object; I have plenty of time before my company come; and I 
want to say a word to you, which I think you will not be displeased 
to hear.'

'What is it?'

'Well.  We were speaking, the other evening, of my black humours.'

Mr. Crisparkle's face falls, and he shakes his head deploringly.

'I said, you know, that I should make you an antidote to those 
black humours; and you said you hoped I would consign them to the 
flames.'

'And I still hope so, Jasper.'

'With the best reason in the world!  I mean to burn this year's 
Diary at the year's end.'

'Because you - ?'  Mr. Crisparkle brightens greatly as he thus 
begins.

'You anticipate me.  Because I feel that I have been out of sorts, 
gloomy, bilious, brain-oppressed, whatever it may be.  You said I 
had been exaggerative.  So I have.'

Mr. Crisparkle's brightened face brightens still more.

'I couldn't see it then, because I WAS out of sorts; but I am in a 
healthier state now, and I acknowledge it with genuine pleasure.  I 
made a great deal of a very little; that's the fact.'

'It does me good,' cries Mr. Crisparkle, 'to hear you say it!'

'A man leading a monotonous life,' Jasper proceeds, 'and getting 
his nerves, or his stomach, out of order, dwells upon an idea until 
it loses its proportions.  That was my case with the idea in 
question.  So I shall burn the evidence of my case, when the book 
is full, and begin the next volume with a clearer vision.'

'This is better,' says Mr. Crisparkle, stopping at the steps of his 
own door to shake hands, 'than I could have hoped.'

'Why, naturally,' returns Jasper.  'You had but little reason to 
hope that I should become more like yourself.  You are always 
training yourself to be, mind and body, as clear as crystal, and 
you always are, and never change; whereas I am a muddy, solitary, 
moping weed.  However, I have got over that mope.  Shall I wait, 
while you ask if Mr. Neville has left for my place?  If not, he and 
I may walk round together.'

'I think,' says Mr. Crisparkle, opening the entrance-door with his 
key, 'that he left some time ago; at least I know he left, and I 
think he has not come back.  But I'll inquire.  You won't come in?'

'My company wait,' said Jasper, with a smile.

The Minor Canon disappears, and in a few moments returns.  As he 
thought, Mr. Neville has not come back; indeed, as he remembers 
now, Mr. Neville said he would probably go straight to the 
gatehouse.

'Bad manners in a host!' says Jasper.  'My company will be there 
before me!  What will you bet that I don't find my company 
embracing?'

'I will bet - or I would, if ever I did bet,' returns Mr. 
Crisparkle, 'that your company will have a gay entertainer this 
evening.'

Jasper nods, and laughs good-night!

He retraces his steps to the Cathedral door, and turns down past it 
to the gatehouse.  He sings, in a low voice and with delicate 
expression, as he walks along.  It still seems as if a false note 
were not within his power to-night, and as if nothing could hurry 
or retard him.  Arriving thus under the arched entrance of his 
dwelling, he pauses for an instant in the shelter to pull off that 
great black scarf, and bang it in a loop upon his arm.  For that 
brief time, his face is knitted and stern.  But it immediately 
clears, as he resumes his singing, and his way.

And so HE goes up the postern stair.

The red light burns steadily all the evening in the lighthouse on 
the margin of the tide of busy life.  Softened sounds and hum of 
traffic pass it and flow on irregularly into the lonely Precincts; 
but very little else goes by, save violent rushes of wind.  It 
comes on to blow a boisterous gale.

The Precincts are never particularly well lighted; but the strong 
blasts of wind blowing out many of the lamps (in some instances 
shattering the frames too, and bringing the glass rattling to the 
ground), they are unusually dark to-night.  The darkness is 
augmented and confused, by flying dust from the earth, dry twigs 
from the trees, and great ragged fragments from the rooks' nests up 
in the tower.  The trees themselves so toss and creak, as this 
tangible part of the darkness madly whirls about, that they seem in 
peril of being torn out of the earth:  while ever and again a 
crack, and a rushing fall, denote that some large branch has 
yielded to the storm.

Not such power of wind has blown for many a winter night.  Chimneys 
topple in the streets, and people hold to posts and corners, and to 
one another, to keep themselves upon their feet.  The violent 
rushes abate not, but increase in frequency and fury until at 
midnight, when the streets are empty, the storm goes thundering 
along them, rattling at all the latches, and tearing at all the 
shutters, as if warning the people to get up and fly with it, 
rather than have the roofs brought down upon their brains.

Still, the red light burns steadily.  Nothing is steady but the red 
light.

All through the night the wind blows, and abates not.  But early in 
the morning, when there is barely enough light in the east to dim 
the stars, it begins to lull.  From that time, with occasional wild 
charges, like a wounded monster dying, it drops and sinks; and at 
full daylight it is dead.

It is then seen that the hands of the Cathedral clock are torn off; 
that lead from the roof has been stripped away, rolled up, and 
blown into the Close; and that some stones have been displaced upon 
the summit of the great tower.  Christmas morning though it be, it 
is necessary to send up workmen, to ascertain the extent of the 
damage done.  These, led by Durdles, go aloft; while Mr. Tope and a 
crowd of early idlers gather down in Minor Canon Corner, shading 
their eyes and watching for their appearance up there.

This cluster is suddenly broken and put aside by the hands of Mr. 
Jasper; all the gazing eyes are brought down to the earth by his 
loudly inquiring of Mr. Crisparkle, at an open window:

'Where is my nephew?'

'He has not been here.  Is he not with you?'

'No.  He went down to the river last night, with Mr. Neville, to 
look at the storm, and has not been back.  Call Mr. Neville!'

'He left this morning, early.'

'Left this morning early?  Let me in! let me in!'

There is no more looking up at the tower, now.  All the assembled 
eyes are turned on Mr. Jasper, white, half-dressed, panting, and 
clinging to the rail before the Minor Canon's house.

CHAPTER XV - IMPEACHED

NEVILLE LANDLESS had started so early and walked at so good a pace, 
that when the church-bells began to ring in Cloisterham for morning 
service, he was eight miles away.  As he wanted his breakfast by 
that time, having set forth on a crust of bread, he stopped at the 
next roadside tavern to refresh.

Visitors in want of breakfast - unless they were horses or cattle, 
for which class of guests there was preparation enough in the way 
of water-trough and hay - were so unusual at the sign of The Tilted 
Wagon, that it took a long time to get the wagon into the track of 
tea and toast and bacon.  Neville in the interval, sitting in a 
sanded parlour, wondering in how long a time after he had gone, the 
sneezy fire of damp fagots would begin to make somebody else warm.

Indeed, The Tilted Wagon, as a cool establishment on the top of a 
hill, where the ground before the door was puddled with damp hoofs 
and trodden straw; where a scolding landlady slapped a moist baby 
(with one red sock on and one wanting), in the bar; where the 
cheese was cast aground upon a shelf, in company with a mouldy 
tablecloth and a green-handled knife, in a sort of cast-iron canoe; 
where the pale-faced bread shed tears of crumb over its shipwreck 
in another canoe; where the family linen, half washed and half 
dried, led a public life of lying about; where everything to drink 
was drunk out of mugs, and everything else was suggestive of a 
rhyme to mugs; The Tilted Wagon, all these things considered, 
hardly kept its painted promise of providing good entertainment for 
Man and Beast.  However, Man, in the present case, was not 
critical, but took what entertainment he could get, and went on 
again after a longer rest than he needed.

He stopped at some quarter of a mile from the house, hesitating 
whether to pursue the road, or to follow a cart track between two 
high hedgerows, which led across the slope of a breezy heath, and 
evidently struck into the road again by-and-by.  He decided in 
favour of this latter track, and pursued it with some toil; the 
rise being steep, and the way worn into deep ruts.

He was labouring along, when he became aware of some other 
pedestrians behind him.  As they were coming up at a faster pace 
than his, he stood aside, against one of the high banks, to let 
them pass.  But their manner was very curious.  Only four of them 
passed.  Other four slackened speed, and loitered as intending to 
follow him when he should go on.  The remainder of the party (half-
a-dozen perhaps) turned, and went back at a great rate.

He looked at the four behind him, and he looked at the four before 
him.  They all returned his look.  He resumed his way.  The four in 
advance went on, constantly looking back; the four in the rear came 
closing up.

When they all ranged out from the narrow track upon the open slope 
of the heath, and this order was maintained, let him diverge as he 
would to either side, there was no longer room to doubt that he was 
beset by these fellows.  He stopped, as a last test; and they all 
stopped.

 'Why do you attend upon me in this way?' he asked the whole body.  
'Are you a pack of thieves?'

'Don't answer him,' said one of the number; he did not see which.  
'Better be quiet.'

'Better be quiet?' repeated Neville.  'Who said so?'

Nobody replied.

'It's good advice, whichever of you skulkers gave it,' he went on 
angrily.  'I will not submit to be penned in between four men 
there, and four men there.  I wish to pass, and I mean to pass, 
those four in front.'

They were all standing still; himself included.

'If eight men, or four men, or two men, set upon one,' he 
proceeded, growing more enraged, 'the one has no chance but to set 
his mark upon some of them.  And, by the Lord, I'll do it, if I am 
interrupted any farther!'

Shouldering his heavy stick, and quickening his pace, he shot on to 
pass the four ahead.  The largest and strongest man of the number 
changed swiftly to the side on which he came up, and dexterously 
closed with him and went down with him; but not before the heavy 
stick had descended smartly.

'Let him be!' said this man in a suppressed voice, as they 
struggled together on the grass.  'Fair play!  His is the build of 
a girl to mine, and he's got a weight strapped to his back besides.  
Let him alone.  I'll manage him.'

After a little rolling about, in a close scuffle which caused the 
faces of both to be besmeared with blood, the man took his knee 
from Neville's chest, and rose, saying:  'There!  Now take him arm-
in-arm, any two of you!'

It was immediately done.

'As to our being a pack of thieves, Mr. Landless,' said the man, as 
he spat out some blood, and wiped more from his face; 'you know 
better than that at midday.  We wouldn't have touched you if you 
hadn't forced us.  We're going to take you round to the high road, 
anyhow, and you'll find help enough against thieves there, if you 
want it. - Wipe his face, somebody; see how it's a-trickling down 
him!'

When his face was cleansed, Neville recognised in the speaker, Joe, 
driver of the Cloisterham omnibus, whom he had seen but once, and 
that on the day of his arrival.

'And what I recommend you for the present, is, don't talk, Mr. 
Landless.  You'll find a friend waiting for you, at the high road - 
gone ahead by the other way when we split into two parties - and 
you had much better say nothing till you come up with him.  Bring 
that stick along, somebody else, and let's be moving!'

Utterly bewildered, Neville stared around him and said not a word.  
Walking between his two conductors, who held his arms in theirs, he 
went on, as in a dream, until they came again into the high road, 
and into the midst of a little group of people.  The men who had 
turned back were among the group; and its central figures were Mr. 
Jasper and Mr. Crisparkle.  Neville's conductors took him up to the 
Minor Canon, and there released him, as an act of deference to that 
gentleman.

'What is all this, sir?  What is the matter?  I feel as if I had 
lost my senses!' cried Neville, the group closing in around him.

'Where is my nephew?' asked Mr. Jasper, wildly.

'Where is your nephew?' repeated Neville, 'Why do you ask me?'

'I ask you,' retorted Jasper, 'because you were the last person in 
his company, and he is not to be found.'

'Not to be found!' cried Neville, aghast.

'Stay, stay,' said Mr. Crisparkle.  'Permit me, Jasper.  Mr. 
Neville, you are confounded; collect your thoughts; it is of great 
importance that you should collect your thoughts; attend to me.'

'I will try, sir, but I seem mad.'

'You left Mr. Jasper last night with Edwin Drood?'

'Yes.'

'At what hour?'

'Was it at twelve o'clock?' asked Neville, with his hand to his 
confused head, and appealing to Jasper.

'Quite right,' said Mr. Crisparkle; 'the hour Mr. Jasper has 
already named to me.  You went down to the river together?'

'Undoubtedly.  To see the action of the wind there.'

'What followed?  How long did you stay there?'

'About ten minutes; I should say not more.  We then walked together 
to your house, and he took leave of me at the door.'

'Did he say that he was going down to the river again?'

'No.  He said that he was going straight back.'

The bystanders looked at one another, and at Mr. Crisparkle.  To 
whom Mr. Jasper, who had been intensely watching Neville, said, in 
a low, distinct, suspicious voice:  'What are those stains upon his 
dress?'

All eyes were turned towards the blood upon his clothes.

'And here are the same stains upon this stick!' said Jasper, taking 
it from the hand of the man who held it.  'I know the stick to be 
his, and he carried it last night.  What does this mean?'

'In the name of God, say what it means, Neville!' urged Mr. 
Crisparkle.

'That man and I,' said Neville, pointing out his late adversary, 
'had a struggle for the stick just now, and you may see the same 
marks on him, sir.  What was I to suppose, when I found myself 
molested by eight people?  Could I dream of the true reason when 
they would give me none at all?'

They admitted that they had thought it discreet to be silent, and 
that the struggle had taken place.  And yet the very men who had 
seen it looked darkly at the smears which the bright cold air had 
already dried.

'We must return, Neville,' said Mr. Crisparkle; 'of course you will 
be glad to come back to clear yourself?'

'Of course, sir.'

'Mr. Landless will walk at my side,' the Minor Canon continued, 
looking around him.  'Come, Neville!'

They set forth on the walk back; and the others, with one 
exception, straggled after them at various distances.  Jasper 
walked on the other side of Neville, and never quitted that 
position.  He was silent, while Mr. Crisparkle more than once 
repeated his former questions, and while Neville repeated his 
former answers; also, while they both hazarded some explanatory 
conjectures.  He was obstinately silent, because Mr. Crisparkle's 
manner directly appealed to him to take some part in the 
discussion, and no appeal would move his fixed face.  When they 
drew near to the city, and it was suggested by the Minor Canon that 
they might do well in calling on the Mayor at once, he assented 
with a stern nod; but he spake no word until they stood in Mr. 
Sapsea's parlour.

Mr. Sapsea being informed by Mr. Crisparkle of the circumstances 
under which they desired to make a voluntary statement before him, 
Mr. Jasper broke silence by declaring that he placed his whole 
reliance, humanly speaking, on Mr. Sapsea's penetration.  There was 
no conceivable reason why his nephew should have suddenly 
absconded, unless Mr. Sapsea could suggest one, and then he would 
defer.  There was no intelligible likelihood of his having returned 
to the river, and been accidentally drowned in the dark, unless it 
should appear likely to Mr. Sapsea, and then again he would defer.  
He washed his hands as clean as he could of all horrible 
suspicions, unless it should appear to Mr. Sapsea that some such 
were inseparable from his last companion before his disappearance 
(not on good terms with previously), and then, once more, he would 
defer.  His own state of mind, he being distracted with doubts, and 
labouring under dismal apprehensions, was not to be safely trusted; 
but Mr. Sapsea's was.

Mr. Sapsea expressed his opinion that the case had a dark look; in 
short (and here his eyes rested full on Neville's countenance), an 
Un-English complexion.  Having made this grand point, he wandered 
into a denser haze and maze of nonsense than even a mayor might 
have been expected to disport himself in, and came out of it with 
the brilliant discovery that to take the life of a fellow-creature 
was to take something that didn't belong to you.  He wavered 
whether or no he should at once issue his warrant for the committal 
of Neville Landless to jail, under circumstances of grave 
suspicion; and he might have gone so far as to do it but for the 
indignant protest of the Minor Canon:  who undertook for the young 
man's remaining in his own house, and being produced by his own 
hands, whenever demanded.  Mr. Jasper then understood Mr. Sapsea to 
suggest that the river should be dragged, that its banks should be 
rigidly examined, that particulars of the disappearance should be 
sent to all outlying places and to London, and that placards and 
advertisements should be widely circulated imploring Edwin Drood, 
if for any unknown reason he had withdrawn himself from his uncle's 
home and society, to take pity on that loving kinsman's sore 
bereavement and distress, and somehow inform him that he was yet 
alive.  Mr. Sapsea was perfectly understood, for this was exactly 
his meaning (though he had said nothing about it); and measures 
were taken towards all these ends immediately.

It would be difficult to determine which was the more oppressed 
with horror and amazement:  Neville Landless, or John Jasper.  But 
that Jasper's position forced him to be active, while Neville's 
forced him to be passive, there would have been nothing to choose 
between them.  Each was bowed down and broken.

With the earliest light of the next morning, men were at work upon 
the river, and other men - most of whom volunteered for the service 
- were examining the banks.  All the livelong day the search went 
on; upon the river, with barge and pole, and drag and net; upon the 
muddy and rushy shore, with jack-boots, hatchet, spade, rope, dogs, 
and all imaginable appliances.  Even at night, the river was 
specked with lanterns, and lurid with fires; far-off creeks, into 
which the tide washed as it changed, had their knots of watchers, 
listening to the lapping of the stream, and looking out for any 
burden it might bear; remote shingly causeways near the sea, and 
lonely points off which there was a race of water, had their 
unwonted flaring cressets and rough-coated figures when the next 
day dawned; but no trace of Edwin Drood revisited the light of the 
sun.

All that day, again, the search went on.  Now, in barge and boat; 
and now ashore among the osiers, or tramping amidst mud and stakes 
and jagged stones in low-lying places, where solitary watermarks 
and signals of strange shapes showed like spectres, John Jasper 
worked and toiled.  But to no purpose; for still no trace of Edwin 
Drood revisited the light of the sun.

Setting his watches for that night again, so that vigilant eyes 
should be kept on every change of tide, he went home exhausted.  
Unkempt and disordered, bedaubed with mud that had dried upon him, 
and with much of his clothing torn to rags, he had but just dropped 
into his easy-chair, when Mr. Grewgious stood before him.

'This is strange news,' said Mr. Grewgious.

'Strange and fearful news.'

Jasper had merely lifted up his heavy eyes to say it, and now 
dropped them again as he drooped, worn out, over one side of his 
easy-chair.

Mr. Grewgious smoothed his head and face, and stood looking at the 
fire.

'How is your ward?' asked Jasper, after a time, in a faint, 
fatigued voice.

'Poor little thing!  You may imagine her condition.'

'Have you seen his sister?' inquired Jasper, as before.

'Whose?'

The curtness of the counter-question, and the cool, slow manner in 
which, as he put it, Mr. Grewgious moved his eyes from the fire to 
his companion's face, might at any other time have been 
exasperating.  In his depression and exhaustion, Jasper merely 
opened his eyes to say:  'The suspected young man's.'

'Do you suspect him?' asked Mr. Grewgious.

'I don't know what to think.  I cannot make up my mind.'

'Nor I,' said Mr. Grewgious.  'But as you spoke of him as the 
suspected young man, I thought you HAD made up your mind. - I have 
just left Miss Landless.'

'What is her state?'

'Defiance of all suspicion, and unbounded faith in her brother.'

'Poor thing!'

'However,' pursued Mr. Grewgious, 'it is not of her that I came to 
speak.  It is of my ward.  I have a communication to make that will 
surprise you.  At least, it has surprised me.'

Jasper, with a groaning sigh, turned wearily in his chair.

'Shall I put it off till to-morrow?' said Mr. Grewgious.  'Mind, I 
warn you, that I think it will surprise you!'

More attention and concentration came into John Jasper's eyes as 
they caught sight of Mr. Grewgious smoothing his head again, and 
again looking at the fire; but now, with a compressed and 
determined mouth.

'What is it?' demanded Jasper, becoming upright in his chair.

'To be sure,' said Mr. Grewgious, provokingly slowly and 
internally, as he kept his eyes on the fire:  'I might have known 
it sooner; she gave me the opening; but I am such an exceedingly 
Angular man, that it never occurred to me; I took all for granted.'

'What is it?' demanded Jasper once more.

Mr. Grewgious, alternately opening and shutting the palms of his 
hands as he warmed them at the fire, and looking fixedly at him 
sideways, and never changing either his action or his look in all 
that followed, went on to reply.

'This young couple, the lost youth and Miss Rosa, my ward, though 
so long betrothed, and so long recognising their betrothal, and so 
near being married - '

Mr. Grewgious saw a staring white face, and two quivering white 
lips, in the easy-chair, and saw two muddy hands gripping its 
sides.  But for the hands, he might have thought he had never seen 
the face.

' - This young couple came gradually to the discovery (made on both 
sides pretty equally, I think), that they would be happier and 
better, both in their present and their future lives, as 
affectionate friends, or say rather as brother and sister, than as 
husband and wife.'

Mr. Grewgious saw a lead-coloured face in the easy-chair, and on 
its surface dreadful starting drops or bubbles, as if of steel.

'This young couple formed at length the healthy resolution of 
interchanging their discoveries, openly, sensibly, and tenderly.  
They met for that purpose.  After some innocent and generous talk, 
they agreed to dissolve their existing, and their intended, 
relations, for ever and ever.'

Mr. Grewgious saw a ghastly figure rise, open-mouthed, from the 
easy-chair, and lift its outspread hands towards its head.

'One of this young couple, and that one your nephew, fearful, 
however, that in the tenderness of your affection for him you would 
be bitterly disappointed by so wide a departure from his projected 
life, forbore to tell you the secret, for a few days, and left it 
to be disclosed by me, when I should come down to speak to you, and 
he would be gone.  I speak to you, and he is gone.'

Mr. Grewgious saw the ghastly figure throw back its head, clutch 
its hair with its hands, and turn with a writhing action from him.

'I have now said all I have to say:  except that this young couple 
parted, firmly, though not without tears and sorrow, on the evening 
when you last saw them together.'

Mr. Grewgious heard a terrible shriek, and saw no ghastly figure, 
sitting or standing; saw nothing but a heap of torn and miry 
clothes upon the floor.

Not changing his action even then, he opened and shut the palms of 
his hands as he warmed them, and looked down at it.

CHAPTER XVI - DEVOTED

WHEN John Jasper recovered from his fit or swoon, he found himself 
being tended by Mr. and Mrs. Tope, whom his visitor had summoned 
for the purpose.  His visitor, wooden of aspect, sat stiffly in a 
chair, with his hands upon his knees, watching his recovery.

'There!  You've come to nicely now, sir,' said the tearful Mrs. 
Tope; 'you were thoroughly worn out, and no wonder!'

'A man,' said Mr. Grewgious, with his usual air of repeating a 
lesson, 'cannot have his rest broken, and his mind cruelly 
tormented, and his body overtaxed by fatigue, without being 
thoroughly worn out.'

'I fear I have alarmed you?' Jasper apologised faintly, when he was 
helped into his easy-chair.

'Not at all, I thank you,' answered Mr. Grewgious.

'You are too considerate.'

'Not at all, I thank you,' answered Mr. Grewgious again.

'You must take some wine, sir,' said Mrs. Tope, 'and the jelly that 
I had ready for you, and that you wouldn't put your lips to at 
noon, though I warned you what would come of it, you know, and you 
not breakfasted; and you must have a wing of the roast fowl that 
has been put back twenty times if it's been put back once.  It 
shall all be on table in five minutes, and this good gentleman 
belike will stop and see you take it.'

This good gentleman replied with a snort, which might mean yes, or 
no, or anything or nothing, and which Mrs. Tope would have found 
highly mystifying, but that her attention was divided by the 
service of the table.

'You will take something with me?' said Jasper, as the cloth was 
laid.

'I couldn't get a morsel down my throat, I thank you,' answered Mr. 
Grewgious.

Jasper both ate and drank almost voraciously.  Combined with the 
hurry in his mode of doing it, was an evident indifference to the 
taste of what he took, suggesting that he ate and drank to fortify 
himself against any other failure of the spirits, far more than to 
gratify his palate.  Mr. Grewgious in the meantime sat upright, 
with no expression in his face, and a hard kind of imperturbably 
polite protest all over him:  as though he would have said, in 
reply to some invitation to discourse; 'I couldn't originate the 
faintest approach to an observation on any subject whatever, I 
thank you.'

'Do you know,' said Jasper, when he had pushed away his plate and 
glass, and had sat meditating for a few minutes:  'do you know that 
I find some crumbs of comfort in the communication with which you 
have so much amazed me?'

'DO you?' returned Mr. Grewgious, pretty plainly adding the 
unspoken clause:  'I don't, I thank you!'

'After recovering from the shock of a piece of news of my dear boy, 
so entirely unexpected, and so destructive of all the castles I had 
built for him; and after having had time to think of it; yes.'

'I shall be glad to pick up your crumbs,' said Mr. Grewgious, 
dryly.

'Is there not, or is there - if I deceive myself, tell me so, and 
shorten my pain - is there not, or is there, hope that, finding 
himself in this new position, and becoming sensitively alive to the 
awkward burden of explanation, in this quarter, and that, and the 
other, with which it would load him, he avoided the awkwardness, 
and took to flight?'

'Such a thing might be,' said Mr. Grewgious, pondering.

'Such a thing has been.  I have read of cases in which people, 
rather than face a seven days' wonder, and have to account for 
themselves to the idle and impertinent, have taken themselves away, 
and been long unheard of.'

'I believe such things have happened,' said Mr. Grewgious, 
pondering still.

'When I had, and could have, no suspicion,' pursued Jasper, eagerly 
following the new track, 'that the dear lost boy had withheld 
anything from me - most of all, such a leading matter as this - 
what gleam of light was there for me in the whole black sky?  When 
I supposed that his intended wife was here, and his marriage close 
at hand, how could I entertain the possibility of his voluntarily 
leaving this place, in a manner that would be so unaccountable, 
capricious, and cruel?  But now that I know what you have told me, 
is there no little chink through which day pierces?  Supposing him 
to have disappeared of his own act, is not his disappearance more 
accountable and less cruel?  The fact of his having just parted 
from your ward, is in itself a sort of reason for his going away.  
It does not make his mysterious departure the less cruel to me, it 
is true; but it relieves it of cruelty to her.'

Mr. Grewgious could not but assent to this.

'And even as to me,' continued Jasper, still pursuing the new 
track, with ardour, and, as he did so, brightening with hope:  'he 
knew that you were coming to me; he knew that you were intrusted to 
tell me what you have told me; if your doing so has awakened a new 
train of thought in my perplexed mind, it reasonably follows that, 
from the same premises, he might have foreseen the inferences that 
I should draw.  Grant that he did foresee them; and even the 
cruelty to me - and who am I! - John Jasper, Music Master, 
vanishes!' -

Once more, Mr. Grewgious could not but assent to this.

'I have had my distrusts, and terrible distrusts they have been,' 
said Jasper; 'but your disclosure, overpowering as it was at first 
- showing me that my own dear boy had had a great disappointing 
reservation from me, who so fondly loved him, kindles hope within 
me.  You do not extinguish it when I state it, but admit it to be a 
reasonable hope.  I begin to believe it possible:' here he clasped 
his hands:  'that he may have disappeared from among us of his own 
accord, and that he may yet be alive and well.'

Mr. Crisparkle came in at the moment.  To whom Mr. Jasper repeated:

'I begin to believe it possible that he may have disappeared of his 
own accord, and may yet be alive and well.'

Mr. Crisparkle taking a seat, and inquiring:  'Why so?'  Mr. Jasper 
repeated the arguments he had just set forth.  If they had been 
less plausible than they were, the good Minor Canon's mind would 
have been in a state of preparation to receive them, as exculpatory 
of his unfortunate pupil.  But he, too, did really attach great 
importance to the lost young man's having been, so immediately 
before his disappearance, placed in a new and embarrassing relation 
towards every one acquainted with his projects and affairs; and the 
fact seemed to him to present the question in a new light.

'I stated to Mr. Sapsea, when we waited on him,' said Jasper:  as 
he really had done:  'that there was no quarrel or difference 
between the two young men at their last meeting.  We all know that 
their first meeting was unfortunately very far from amicable; but 
all went smoothly and quietly when they were last together at my 
house.  My dear boy was not in his usual spirits; he was depressed 
- I noticed that - and I am bound henceforth to dwell upon the 
circumstance the more, now that I know there was a special reason 
for his being depressed:  a reason, moreover, which may possibly 
have induced him to absent himself.'

'I pray to Heaven it may turn out so!' exclaimed Mr. Crisparkle.

'I pray to Heaven it may turn out so!' repeated Jasper.  'You know 
- and Mr. Grewgious should now know likewise - that I took a great 
prepossession against Mr. Neville Landless, arising out of his 
furious conduct on that first occasion.  You know that I came to 
you, extremely apprehensive, on my dear boy's behalf, of his mad 
violence.  You know that I even entered in my Diary, and showed the 
entry to you, that I had dark forebodings against him.  Mr. 
Grewgious ought to be possessed of the whole case.  He shall not, 
through any suppression of mine, be informed of a part of it, and 
kept in ignorance of another part of it.  I wish him to be good 
enough to understand that the communication he has made to me has 
hopefully influenced my mind, in spite of its having been, before 
this mysterious occurrence took place, profoundly impressed against 
young Landless.'

This fairness troubled the Minor Canon much.  He felt that he was 
not as open in his own dealing.  He charged against himself 
reproachfully that he had suppressed, so far, the two points of a 
second strong outbreak of temper against Edwin Drood on the part of 
Neville, and of the passion of jealousy having, to his own certain 
knowledge, flamed up in Neville's breast against him.  He was 
convinced of Neville's innocence of any part in the ugly 
disappearance; and yet so many little circumstances combined so 
wofully against him, that he dreaded to add two more to their 
cumulative weight.  He was among the truest of men; but he had been 
balancing in his mind, much to its distress, whether his 
volunteering to tell these two fragments of truth, at this time, 
would not be tantamount to a piecing together of falsehood in the 
place of truth.

However, here was a model before him.  He hesitated no longer.  
Addressing Mr. Grewgious, as one placed in authority by the 
revelation he had brought to bear on the mystery (and surpassingly 
Angular Mr. Grewgious became when he found himself in that 
unexpected position), Mr. Crisparkle bore his testimony to Mr. 
Jasper's strict sense of justice, and, expressing his absolute 
confidence in the complete clearance of his pupil from the least 
taint of suspicion, sooner or later, avowed that his confidence in 
that young gentleman had been formed, in spite of his confidential 
knowledge that his temper was of the hottest and fiercest, and that 
it was directly incensed against Mr. Jasper's nephew, by the 
circumstance of his romantically supposing himself to be enamoured 
of the same young lady.  The sanguine reaction manifest in Mr. 
Jasper was proof even against this unlooked-for declaration.  It 
turned him paler; but he repeated that he would cling to the hope 
he had derived from Mr. Grewgious; and that if no trace of his dear 
boy were found, leading to the dreadful inference that he had been 
made away with, he would cherish unto the last stretch of 
possibility the idea, that he might have absconded of his own wild 
will.

Now, it fell out that Mr. Crisparkle, going away from this 
conference still very uneasy in his mind, and very much troubled on 
behalf of the young man whom he held as a kind of prisoner in his 
own house, took a memorable night walk.

He walked to Cloisterham Weir.

He often did so, and consequently there was nothing remarkable in 
his footsteps tending that way.  But the preoccupation of his mind 
so hindered him from planning any walk, or taking heed of the 
objects he passed, that his first consciousness of being near the 
Weir, was derived from the sound of the falling water close at 
hand.

'How did I come here!' was his first thought, as he stopped.

'Why did I come here!' was his second.

Then, he stood intently listening to the water.  A familiar passage 
in his reading, about airy tongues that syllable men's names, rose 
so unbidden to his ear, that he put it from him with his hand, as 
if it were tangible.

It was starlight.  The Weir was full two miles above the spot to 
which the young men had repaired to watch the storm.  No search had 
been made up here, for the tide had been running strongly down, at 
that time of the night of Christmas Eve, and the likeliest places 
for the discovery of a body, if a fatal accident had happened under 
such circumstances, all lay - both when the tide ebbed, and when it 
flowed again - between that spot and the sea.  The water came over 
the Weir, with its usual sound on a cold starlight night, and 
little could be seen of it; yet Mr. Crisparkle had a strange idea 
that something unusual hung about the place.

He reasoned with himself:  What was it?  Where was it?  Put it to 
the proof.  Which sense did it address?

No sense reported anything unusual there.  He listened again, and 
his sense of hearing again checked the water coming over the Weir, 
with its usual sound on a cold starlight night.

Knowing very well that the mystery with which his mind was 
occupied, might of itself give the place this haunted air, he 
strained those hawk's eyes of his for the correction of his sight.  
He got closer to the Weir, and peered at its well-known posts and 
timbers.  Nothing in the least unusual was remotely shadowed forth.  
But he resolved that he would come back early in the morning.

The Weir ran through his broken sleep, all night, and he was back 
again at sunrise.  It was a bright frosty morning.  The whole 
composition before him, when he stood where he had stood last 
night, was clearly discernible in its minutest details.  He had 
surveyed it closely for some minutes, and was about to withdraw his 
eyes, when they were attracted keenly to one spot.

He turned his back upon the Weir, and looked far away at the sky, 
and at the earth, and then looked again at that one spot.  It 
caught his sight again immediately, and he concentrated his vision 
upon it.  He could not lose it now, though it was but such a speck 
in the landscape.  It fascinated his sight.  His hands began 
plucking off his coat.  For it struck him that at that spot - a 
corner of the Weir - something glistened, which did not move and 
come over with the glistening water-drops, but remained stationary.

He assured himself of this, he threw off his clothes, he plunged 
into the icy water, and swam for the spot.  Climbing the timbers, 
he took from them, caught among their interstices by its chain, a 
gold watch, bearing engraved upon its back E. D.

He brought the watch to the bank, swam to the Weir again, climbed 
it, and dived off.  He knew every hole and corner of all the 
depths, and dived and dived and dived, until he could bear the cold 
no more.  His notion was, that he would find the body; he only 
found a shirt-pin sticking in some mud and ooze.

With these discoveries he returned to Cloisterham, and, taking 
Neville Landless with him, went straight to the Mayor.  Mr. Jasper 
was sent for, the watch and shirt-pin were identified, Neville was 
detained, and the wildest frenzy and fatuity of evil report rose 
against him.  He was of that vindictive and violent nature, that 
but for his poor sister, who alone had influence over him, and out 
of whose sight he was never to be trusted, he would be in the daily 
commission of murder.  Before coming to England he had caused to be 
whipped to death sundry 'Natives' - nomadic persons, encamping now 
in Asia, now in Africa, now in the West Indies, and now at the 
North Pole - vaguely supposed in Cloisterham to be always black, 
always of great virtue, always calling themselves Me, and everybody 
else Massa or Missie (according to sex), and always reading tracts 
of the obscurest meaning, in broken English, but always accurately 
understanding them in the purest mother tongue.  He had nearly 
brought Mrs. Crisparkle's grey hairs with sorrow to the grave.  
(Those original expressions were Mr. Sapsea's.)  He had repeatedly 
said he would have Mr. Crisparkle's life.  He had repeatedly said 
he would have everybody's life, and become in effect the last man.  
He had been brought down to Cloisterham, from London, by an eminent 
Philanthropist, and why?  Because that Philanthropist had expressly 
declared:  'I owe it to my fellow-creatures that he should be, in 
the words of BENTHAM, where he is the cause of the greatest danger 
to the smallest number.'

These dropping shots from the blunderbusses of blunderheadedness 
might not have hit him in a vital place.  But he had to stand 
against a trained and well-directed fire of arms of precision too.  
He had notoriously threatened the lost young man, and had, 
according to the showing of his own faithful friend and tutor who 
strove so hard for him, a cause of bitter animosity (created by 
himself, and stated by himself), against that ill-starred fellow.  
He had armed himself with an offensive weapon for the fatal night, 
and he had gone off early in the morning, after making preparations 
for departure.  He had been found with traces of blood on him; 
truly, they might have been wholly caused as he represented, but 
they might not, also.  On a search-warrant being issued for the 
examination of his room, clothes, and so forth, it was discovered 
that he had destroyed all his papers, and rearranged all his 
possessions, on the very afternoon of the disappearance.  The watch 
found at the Weir was challenged by the jeweller as one he had 
wound and set for Edwin Drood, at twenty minutes past two on that 
same afternoon; and it had run down, before being cast into the 
water; and it was the jeweller's positive opinion that it had never 
been re-wound.  This would justify the hypothesis that the watch 
was taken from him not long after he left Mr. Jasper's house at 
midnight, in company with the last person seen with him, and that 
it had been thrown away after being retained some hours.  Why 
thrown away?  If he had been murdered, and so artfully disfigured, 
or concealed, or both, as that the murderer hoped identification to 
be impossible, except from something that he wore, assuredly the 
murderer would seek to remove from the body the most lasting, the 
best known, and the most easily recognisable, things upon it.  
Those things would be the watch and shirt-pin.  As to his 
opportunities of casting them into the river; if he were the object 
of these suspicions, they were easy.  For, he had been seen by many 
persons, wandering about on that side of the city - indeed on all 
sides of it - in a miserable and seemingly half-distracted manner.  
As to the choice of the spot, obviously such criminating evidence 
had better take its chance of being found anywhere, rather than 
upon himself, or in his possession.  Concerning the reconciliatory 
nature of the appointed meeting between the two young men, very 
little could be made of that in young Landless's favour; for it 
distinctly appeared that the meeting originated, not with him, but 
with Mr. Crisparkle, and that it had been urged on by Mr. 
Crisparkle; and who could say how unwillingly, or in what ill-
conditioned mood, his enforced pupil had gone to it?  The more his 
case was looked into, the weaker it became in every point.  Even 
the broad suggestion that the lost young man had absconded, was 
rendered additionally improbable on the showing of the young lady 
from whom he had so lately parted; for; what did she say, with 
great earnestness and sorrow, when interrogated?  That he had, 
expressly and enthusiastically, planned with her, that he would 
await the arrival of her guardian, Mr. Grewgious.  And yet, be it 
observed, he disappeared before that gentleman appeared.

On the suspicions thus urged and supported, Neville was detained, 
and re-detained, and the search was pressed on every hand, and 
Jasper laboured night and day.  But nothing more was found.  No 
discovery being made, which proved the lost man to be dead, it at 
length became necessary to release the person suspected of having 
made away with him.  Neville was set at large.  Then, a consequence 
ensued which Mr. Crisparkle had too well foreseen.  Neville must 
leave the place, for the place shunned him and cast him out.  Even 
had it not been so, the dear old china shepherdess would have 
worried herself to death with fears for her son, and with general 
trepidation occasioned by their having such an inmate.  Even had 
that not been so, the authority to which the Minor Canon deferred 
officially, would have settled the point.

'Mr. Crisparkle,' quoth the Dean, 'human justice may err, but it 
must act according to its lights.  The days of taking sanctuary are 
past.  This young man must not take sanctuary with us.'

'You mean that he must leave my house, sir?'

'Mr. Crisparkle,' returned the prudent Dean, 'I claim no authority 
in your house.  I merely confer with you, on the painful necessity 
you find yourself under, of depriving this young man of the great 
advantages of your counsel and instruction.'

'It is very lamentable, sir,' Mr. Crisparkle represented.

'Very much so,' the Dean assented.

'And if it be a necessity - ' Mr. Crisparkle faltered.

'As you unfortunately find it to be,' returned the Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle bowed submissively:  'It is hard to prejudge his 
case, sir, but I am sensible that - '

'Just so.  Perfectly.  As you say, Mr. Crisparkle,' interposed the 
Dean, nodding his head smoothly, 'there is nothing else to be done.  
No doubt, no doubt.  There is no alternative, as your good sense 
has discovered.'

'I am entirely satisfied of his perfect innocence, sir, 
nevertheless.'

'We-e-ell!' said the Dean, in a more confidential tone, and 
slightly glancing around him, 'I would not say so, generally.  Not 
generally.  Enough of suspicion attaches to him to - no, I think I 
would not say so, generally.'

Mr. Crisparkle bowed again.

'It does not become us, perhaps,' pursued the Dean, 'to be 
partisans.  Not partisans.  We clergy keep our hearts warm and our 
heads cool, and we hold a judicious middle course.'

'I hope you do not object, sir, to my having stated in public, 
emphatically, that he will reappear here, whenever any new 
suspicion may be awakened, or any new circumstance may come to 
light in this extraordinary matter?'

'Not at all,' returned the Dean.  'And yet, do you know, I don't 
think,' with a very nice and neat emphasis on those two words:  'I 
DON'T THINK I would state it emphatically.  State it?  Ye-e-es!  
But emphatically?  No-o-o.  I THINK not.  In point of fact, Mr. 
Crisparkle, keeping our hearts warm and our heads cool, we clergy 
need do nothing emphatically.'

So Minor Canon Row knew Neville Landless no more; and he went 
whithersoever he would, or could, with a blight upon his name and 
fame.

It was not until then that John Jasper silently resumed his place 
in the choir.  Haggard and red-eyed, his hopes plainly had deserted 
him, his sanguine mood was gone, and all his worst misgivings had 
come back.  A day or two afterwards, while unrobing, he took his 
Diary from a pocket of his coat, turned the leaves, and with an 
impressive look, and without one spoken word, handed this entry to 
Mr. Crisparkle to read:

'My dear boy is murdered.  The discovery of the watch and shirt-pin 
convinces me that he was murdered that night, and that his 
jewellery was taken from him to prevent identification by its 
means.  All the delusive hopes I had founded on his separation from 
his betrothed wife, I give to the winds.  They perish before this 
fatal discovery.  I now swear, and record the oath on this page, 
That I nevermore will discuss this mystery with any human creature 
until I hold the clue to it in my hand.  That I never will relax in 
my secrecy or in my search.  That I will fasten the crime of the 
murder of my dear dead boy upon the murderer.  And, That I devote 
myself to his destruction.'

CHAPTER XVII - PHILANTHROPY, PROFESSIONAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL

FULL half a year had come and gone, and Mr. Crisparkle sat in a 
waiting-room in the London chief offices of the Haven of 
Philanthropy, until he could have audience of Mr. Honeythunder.

In his college days of athletic exercises, Mr. Crisparkle had known 
professors of the Noble Art of fisticuffs, and had attended two or 
three of their gloved gatherings.  He had now an opportunity of 
observing that as to the phrenological formation of the backs of 
their heads, the Professing Philanthropists were uncommonly like 
the Pugilists.  In the development of all those organs which 
constitute, or attend, a propensity to 'pitch into' your fellow-
creatures, the Philanthropists were remarkably favoured.  There 
were several Professors passing in and out, with exactly the 
aggressive air upon them of being ready for a turn-up with any 
Novice who might happen to be on hand, that Mr. Crisparkle well 
remembered in the circles of the Fancy.  Preparations were in 
progress for a moral little Mill somewhere on the rural circuit, 
and other Professors were backing this or that Heavy-Weight as good 
for such or such speech-making hits, so very much after the manner 
of the sporting publicans, that the intended Resolutions might have 
been Rounds.  In an official manager of these displays much 
celebrated for his platform tactics, Mr. Crisparkle recognised (in 
a suit of black) the counterpart of a deceased benefactor of his 
species, an eminent public character, once known to fame as Frosty-
faced Fogo, who in days of yore superintended the formation of the 
magic circle with the ropes and stakes.  There were only three 
conditions of resemblance wanting between these Professors and 
those.  Firstly, the Philanthropists were in very bad training:  
much too fleshy, and presenting, both in face and figure, a 
superabundance of what is known to Pugilistic Experts as Suet 
Pudding.  Secondly, the Philanthropists had not the good temper of 
the Pugilists, and used worse language.  Thirdly, their fighting 
code stood in great need of revision, as empowering them not only 
to bore their man to the ropes, but to bore him to the confines of 
distraction; also to hit him when he was down, hit him anywhere and 
anyhow, kick him, stamp upon him, gouge him, and maul him behind 
his back without mercy.  In these last particulars the Professors 
of the Noble Art were much nobler than the Professors of 
Philanthropy.

Mr. Crisparkle was so completely lost in musing on these 
similarities and dissimilarities, at the same time watching the 
crowd which came and went by, always, as it seemed, on errands of 
antagonistically snatching something from somebody, and never 
giving anything to anybody, that his name was called before he 
heard it.  On his at length responding, he was shown by a miserably 
shabby and underpaid stipendiary Philanthropist (who could hardly 
have done worse if he had taken service with a declared enemy of 
the human race) to Mr. Honeythunder's room.

'Sir,' said Mr. Honeythunder, in his tremendous voice, like a 
schoolmaster issuing orders to a boy of whom he had a bad opinion, 
'sit down.'

Mr. Crisparkle seated himself.

Mr. Honeythunder having signed the remaining few score of a few 
thousand circulars, calling upon a corresponding number of families 
without means to come forward, stump up instantly, and be 
Philanthropists, or go to the Devil, another shabby stipendiary 
Philanthropist (highly disinterested, if in earnest) gathered these 
into a basket and walked off with them.

'Now, Mr. Crisparkle,' said Mr. Honeythunder, turning his chair 
half round towards him when they were alone, and squaring his arms 
with his hands on his knees, and his brows knitted, as if he added, 
I am going to make short work of YOU:  'Now, Mr. Crisparkle, we 
entertain different views, you and I, sir, of the sanctity of human 
life.'

'Do we?' returned the Minor Canon.

'We do, sir?'

'Might I ask you,' said the Minor Canon:  'what are your views on 
that subject?'
                               TALE OF TWO CITIES

  I

  THE PERIOD

  IT WAS the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the
age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of
belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light,
it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the
winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing
before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going
direct the other way- in short, the period was so far like the present
period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being
received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of
comparison only.

  There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face, on
the throne of England; there were a king with a large jaw and a
queen with a fair face, on the throne of France. In both countries
it was clearer than crystal to the lords of the State preserves of
loaves and fishes, that things in general were settled for ever.

  It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five. Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at that
favoured period, as at this. Mrs. Southcott had recently attained
her five-and-twentieth blessed birthday, of whom a prophetic private
in the Life Guards had heralded the sublime appearance by announcing
that arrangements were made for the swallowing up of London and
Westminster. Even the Cock-lane ghost had been laid only a round dozen
of years, after rapping out its messages, as the spirits of this
very year last past (supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped
out theirs. Mere messages in the earthly order of events had lately
come to the English Crown and People, from a congress of British
subjects in America: which, strange to relate, have proved more
important to the human race than any communications yet received
through any of the chickens of the Cock-lane brood.

  France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual than
her sister of the shield and trident, rolled with exceeding smoothness
down hill, making paper money and spending it. Under the guidance of
her Christian pastors, she entertained herself, besides, with such
humane achievements as sentencing a youth to have his hands cut off,
his tongue torn out with pincers, and his body burned alive, because
he had not kneeled down in the rain to do honour to a dirty procession
of monks which passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty
or sixty yards. It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods of
France and Norway, there were growing trees, when that sufferer was
put to death, already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to come down and be
sawn into boards, to make a certain movable framework with a sack
and a knife in it, terrible in history. It is likely enough that in
the rough outhouses of some tillers of the heavy lands adjacent to
Paris, there were sheltered from the weather that very day, rude
carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffed about by pigs, and
roosted in by poultry, which the Farmer, Death, had already set
apart to be his tumbrils of the Revolution. But that Woodman and
that Farmer, though they work unceasingly, work silently and no one
heard them as they went about with muffled tread: the rather,
forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion that they were awake, was to
be atheistical and traitorous.

  In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protection
to justify much national boasting. Daring burglaries by armed men, and
highway robberies, took place in the capital itself every night;
families were publicly cautioned not to go out of town without
removing their furniture to upholsterers' warehouses for security; the
highwayman in the dark was a City tradesman in the light, and, being
recognised and challenged by his fellow-tradesman whom he stopped in
his character of "the Captain," gallantly shot him through the head
and rode away; the mail was waylaid by seven robbers, and the guard
shot three dead, and then got shot dead himself by the other four, "in
consequence of the failure of his ammunition:" after which the mail
was robbed in peace; that magnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of
London, was made to stand and deliver on Turnham Green, by one
highwayman, who despoiled the illustrious creature in sight of all his
retinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with their
turkeys, and the majesty of the law fired blunderbusses in among them,
loaded with rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped off diamond
crosses from the necks of noble lords at Court drawing-rooms;
musketeers went into St. Giles's, to search for contraband goods,
and the mob fired on the musketeers, and the musketeers fir on the
mob, and nobody thought any of these occurrences much out of the
common way. In the midst of them, the hangman, ever busy and ever
worse than useless, was in constant requisition; now, stringing up
long rows of miscellaneous criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on
Saturday who had been taken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the
hand at Newgate by the dozen, and now burning pamphlets at the door of
Westminster Hall; to-day, taking the life of an atrocious murderer,
and to-morrow of a wretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer's boy
of sixpence.

  All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass in and
close upon the dear old year one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five. Environed by them, while the Woodman and the Farmer
worked unheeded, those two of the large jaws, and those other two of
the plain and the fair faces, trod with stir enough, and carried their
divine rights with a high hand. Thus did the year one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-five conduct their Greatnesses, and myriads of
small creatures- the creatures of this chronicle among the rest- along
the roads that lay before them.

  II

  THE MAIL

  IT WAS the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in
November, before the first of the persons with whom this history has
business. The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as
it lumbered up Shooter's Hill. He walked up hill in the mire by the
side of the mail, as the rest of the passengers did; not because
they had the least relish for walking exercise, under the
circumstances, but because the hill, and the harness, and the mud, and
the mail, were all so heavy, that the horses had three times already
come to a stop, besides once drawing the coach across the road, with
the mutinous intent of taking it back to Blackheath. Reins and whip
and coachman and guard, however, in combination, had read that article
of war which forbade a purpose otherwise strongly in favour of the
argument, that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and the team
had capitulated and returned to their duty.

  With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their way
through the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles, as if
they were falling to pieces at the larger joints. As often as the
driver rested them and brought them to a stand, with a wary "Wo-ho!
so-ho-then!" the near leader violently shook his head and everything
upon it- like an unusually emphatic horse, denying that the coach
could be got up the hill. Whenever the leader made this rattle, the
passenger started, as a nervous passenger might, and was disturbed
in mind.

  There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed in
its forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest and
finding none. A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its slow way
through the air in ripples that visibly followed and overspread one
another, as the waves of an unwholesome sea might do. It was dense
enough to shut out everything from the light of the coach-lamps but
these its own workings, and a few yards of road; and the reek of the
labouring horses steamed into it, as if they had made it all.

  Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill
by the side of the mail. All three were wrapped to the cheekbones
and over the cars, and wore jack-boots. Not one of the three could
have said, from anything he saw, what either of the other two was
like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappers from the
eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of his two companions.
In those days, travellers were very shy of being confidential on a
short notice, for anybody on the road might be a robber or in league
with robbers. As to the latter, when every posting-house and ale-house
could produce somebody in "the Captain's" pay, ranging from the
landlord to the lowest stable nondescript, it was the likeliest
thing upon the cards. So the guard of the Dover mail thought to
himself, that Friday night in November, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter's Hill, as he stood on his own
particular perch behind the mail, beating his feet, and keeping an eye
and a hand on the arm-chest before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay
at the top of six or eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a
substratum of cutlass.

  The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard
suspected the passengers, the passengers suspected one another and the
guard, they all suspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of
nothing but the horses; as to which cattle he could with a clear
conscience have taken his oath on the two Testaments that they were
not fit for the journey.

  "Wo-ho!" said the coachman. "So, then! One more pull and you're at
the top and be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to get you
to it!- Joe!"

  "Halloa!" the guard replied.

  "What o'clock do you make it, Joe?"

  "Ten minutes, good, past eleven."

  "My blood!" ejaculated the vexed coachman, "and not atop of
Shooter's yet! Tst! Yah! Get on with you!"

  The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided
negative, made a decided scramble for it, and the three other horses
followed suit. Once more, the Dover mail struggled on, with the
jack-boots of its passengers squashing along by its side. They had
stopped when the coach stopped, and they kept close company with it.
If any one of the three had had the hardihood to propose to another to
walk on a little ahead into the mist and darkness, he would have put
himself in a fair way of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.

  The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill. The
horses stopped to breathe again, and the guard got down to skid the
wheel for the descent, and open the coach-door to let the passengers
in.

  "Tst! Joe!" cried the coachman in a warning voice, looking down from
his box.

  "What do you say, Tom?"

  They both listened.

  "I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe."

  "I say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned the guard, leaving his
hold of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place. "Gentlemen! In the
king's name, all of you!"

  With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and stood
on the offensive.

  The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step, getting
in; the two other passengers were close behind him, and about to
follow. He remained on the step, half in the coach and half out of;
they remained in the road below him. They all looked from the coachman
to the guard, and from the guard to the coachman, and listened. The
coachman looked back and the guard looked back, and even the
emphatic leader pricked up his ears and looked back, without
contradicting.

  The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and
labouring of the coach, added to the stillness of the night, made it
very quiet indeed. The panting of the horses communicated a
tremulous motion to the coach, as if it were in a state of
agitation. The hearts of the passengers beat loud enough perhaps to be
heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audibly expressive of
people out of breath, and holding the breath, and having the pulses
quickened by expectation.

  The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up the
hill.

  "So-ho!" the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar. "Yo there!
Stand! I shall fire!"

  The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and
floundering, a man's voice called from the mist, "Is that the Dover
mail?"

  "Never you mind what it is!" the guard retorted. "What are you?"

  "Is that the Dover mail?"

  "Why do you want to know?"

  "I want a passenger, if it is."

  "What passenger?"

  "Mr. Jarvis Lorry."

  Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name. The
guard, the coachman, and the two other passengers eyed him
distrustfully.

  "Keep where you are," the guard called to the voice in the mist,
"because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set right in
your lifetime. Gentleman of the name of Lorry answer straight."

  "What is the matter?" asked the passenger, then, with mildly
quavering speech. "Who wants me? Is it Jerry?"

  ("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled the guard
to himself. "He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")

  "Yes, Mr. Lorry."

  "What is the matter?"

  "A despatch sent after you from over yonder. T. and Co."

  "I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down into
the road- assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the other
two passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach, shut the
door, and pulled up the window. "He may come close; there's nothing
wrong."

  "I hope there ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that," said
the guard, in gruff soliloquy. "Hallo you!"

  "Well! And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.

  "Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me? And if you've got holsters
to that saddle o' yourn, don't let me see your hand go nigh 'em. For
I'm a devil at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takes the
form of Lead. So now let's look at you."

  The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying
mist, and came to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood. The
rider stooped, and, casting up his eyes at the guard, handed the
passenger a small folded paper. The rider's horse was blown, and
both horse and rider were covered with mud, from the hoofs of the
horse to the hat of the man.

  "Guard!" said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.

  The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raised
blunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman,
answered curtly, "Sir."

  "There is nothing to apprehend. I belong to Tellson's Bank. You must
know Tellson's Bank in London. I am going to Paris on business. A
crown to drink. I may read this?"

  "If so be as you're quick, sir."

  He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side, and
read- first to himself and then aloud: "'Wait at Dover for Mam'selle.'
It's not long, you see, guard. Jerry, say that my answer was, RECALLED
TO LIFE."

  Jerry started in his saddle. "That's a Blazing strange answer, too,"
said he, at his hoarsest.

  "Take that message back, and they will know that I received this, as
well as if I wrote. Make the best of your way. Good night."

  With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in; not
at all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had expeditiously
secreted their watches and purses in their boots, and were now
making a general pretence of being asleep. With no more definite
purpose than to escape the hazard of originating any other kind of
action.

  The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing
round it as it began the descent. The guard soon replaced his
blunderbuss in his arm-chest, and, having looked to the rest of its
contents, and having looked to the supplementary pistols that he
wore in his belt, looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in which
there were a few smith's tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box.
For he was furnished with that completeness that if the coach-lamps
had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he
had only to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks
well off the straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if
he were lucky) in five minutes.

  "Tom!" softly over the coach roof.

  "Hallo, Joe."

  "Did you hear the message?"

  "I did, Joe."

  "What did you make of it, Tom?"

  "Nothing at all, Joe."

  "That's a coincidence, too," the guard mused, "for I made the same
of it myself."

  Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile,
not only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from his face,
and shake the wet out of his hat-brim, which might be capable of
holding about half a gallon. After standing with the bridle over his
heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of the mail were no longer
within hearing and the night was quite still again, he turned to
walk down the hill.

  "After that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trust
your fore-legs till I get you on the level," said this hoarse
messenger, glancing at his mare. "'Recalled to life.' That's a Blazing
strange message. Much of that wouldn't do for you, Jerry! I say,
Jerry! You'd be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to life was to come
into fashion, Jerry!"

  III

  THE NIGHT SHADOWS

  A WONDERFUL FACT to reflect upon, that every human creature is
constituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every other. A
solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, that every
one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret; that
every room in every one of them encloses its own secret; that every
beating heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there, is, in
some of its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it! Something of
the awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to this. No more can
I turn the leaves of this dear book that I loved, and vainly hope in
time to read it all. No more can I look into the depths of this
unfathomable water, wherein, as momentary lights glanced into it, I
have had glimpses of buried treasure and other things submerged. It
was appointed that the book should shut with a spring, for ever and
for ever, when I had read but a page. It was appointed that the
water should be locked in an eternal frost, when the light was playing
on its surface, and I stood in ignorance on the shore. My friend is
dead, my neighbour is dead, my love, the darling of my soul, is
dead; it is the inexorable consolidation and perpetuation of the
secret that was always in that individuality, and which I shall
carry in mine to my life's end. In any of the burial-places of this
city through which I pass, is there a sleeper more inscrutable than
its busy inhabitants are, in their innermost personality, to me, or
than I am to them?

  As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance, the
messenger on horseback had exactly the same possessions as the King,
the first Minister of State, or the richest merchant in London. So
with the three passengers shut up in the narrow compass of one
lumbering old mail coach; they were mysteries to one another, as
complete as if each had been in his own coach and six, or his own
coach and sixty, with the breadth of a county between him and the
next.

  The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at
alehouses by the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his own
counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes. He had eyes that
assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surface black,
with no depth in the colour or form, and much too near together- as if
they were afraid of being found out in something, singly, if they kept
too far apart. They had a sinister expression, under an old cocked-hat
like a three-cornered spittoon, and over a great muffler for the
chin and throat, which descended nearly to the wearer's knees. When he
stopped for drink, he moved this muffler with his left hand, only
while he poured his liquor in with his right; as soon as that was
done, he muffled again.

  "No, Jerry, no!" said the messenger, harping on one theme as he
rode. "It wouldn't do for you, Jerry. Jerry, you honest tradesman,
it wouldn't suit your line of business! Recalled-! Bust me if I
don't think he'd been a drinking!"

  His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain,
several times, to take off his hat to scratch his head. Except on
the crown, which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair, standing
jaggedly all over it, and growing down hill almost to his broad, blunt
nose. It was so like Smith's work, so much more like the top of a
strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that the best of players
at leap-frog might have declined him, as the most dangerous man in the
world to go over.

  While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the
night watchman in his box at the door of Tellson's Bank, by Temple
Bar, who was to deliver it to greater authorities within, the
shadows of the night took such shapes to him as arose out of the
message, and took such shapes to the mare as arose out of her
private topics of uneasiness. They seemed to be numerous, for she
shied at every shadow on the road.

  What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon
its tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside. To whom,
likewise, the shadows of the night revealed themselves, in the forms
their dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested.

  Tellson's Bank had a run upon it in the mail. As the bank passenger-
with an arm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what lay in it
to keep him from pounding against the next passenger, and driving
him into his corner, whenever the coach got a special jolt- nodded in
his place, with half-shut eyes, the little coach-windows, and the
coach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and the bulky bundle of
opposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great stroke of
business. The rattle of the harness was the chink of money, and more
drafts were honoured in five minutes than even Tellson's with all
its foreign and home connection, ever paid in thrice the time. Then
the strong-rooms underground, at Tellson's, with such of their
valuable stores and secrets as were known to the passenger (and it was
not a little that he knew about them), opened before him, and he
went in among them with the great keys and the feebly-burning
candle, and found them safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as
he had last seen them.

  But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the
coach (in a confused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate)
was always with him, there was another current of impression that
never ceased to run, all through the night. He was on his way to dig
some one out of a grave.

  Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves before
him was the true face of the buried person, the shadows of the night
did not indicate; but they were all the faces of a man of
five-and-forty by years, and they differed principally in the passions
they expressed, and in the ghastliness of their worn and wasted state.
Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation,
succeeded one another; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverous
colour, emaciated hands and figures. But the face was in the main
one face, and every head was prematurely white. A hundred times the
dozing passenger inquired of this spectre:

  "Buried how long?"

  The answer was always the same: "Almost eighteen years."

  "You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

  "Long ago."

  "You know that you are recalled to life?"

  "They tell me so."

  "I hope you care to live?"

  "I can't say."

  "Shall I show her to you? Will you come and see her?"

  The answers to this question were various and contradictory.
Sometimes the broken reply was, "Wait! It would kill me if I saw her
too soon." Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears, and then
it was, "Take me to her." Sometimes it was staring and bewildered, and
then it was, "I don't know her. I don't understand."

  After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would
dig, and dig, dig- now with a spade, now with a great key, now with
his hands- to dig this wretched creature out. Got out at last, with
earth hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fall away
to dust. The passenger would then start to himself, and lower the
window, to get the reality of mist and rain on his cheek.

  Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on the
moving patch of light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadside
retreating by jerks, the night shadows outside the coach would fall
into the train of the night shadows within. The real Banking-house
by Temple Bar, the real business of the past day, the real strong
rooms, the real express sent after him, and the real message returned,
would all be there. Out of the midst of them, the ghostly face would
rise, and he would accost it again.

  "Buried how long?"

  "Almost eighteen years."

  "I hope you care to live?"

  "I can't say."

  Dig- dig- dig- until an impatient movement from one of the two
passengers would admonish him to pull up the window, draw his arm
securely through the leathern strap, and speculate upon the two
slumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of them, and they again
slid away into the bank and the grave.

  "Buried how long?"

  "Almost eighteen years."

  "You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

  "Long ago."

  The words were still in his hearing as just spoken- distinctly in
his hearing as ever spoken words had been in his life- when the
weary passenger started to the consciousness of daylight, and found
that the shadows of the night were gone.

  He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun. There was a
ridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left
last night when the horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood,
in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remained
upon the trees. Though the earth was cold and wet, the sky was
clear, and the sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful.

  "Eighteen years!" said the passenger, looking at the sun.
"Gracious Creator of day! To be buried alive for eighteen years!"

  IV

  THE PREPARATION

  WHEN THE MAIL got successfully to Dover, in the course of the
forenoon, the head drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened the
coach-door as his custom was. He did it with some flourish of
ceremony, for a mail journey from London in winter was an
achievement to congratulate an adventurous traveller upon.

  By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left to be
congratulated: for the two others had been set down at their
respective roadside destinations. The mildewy inside of the coach,
with its damp and dirty straw, its disagreeable smell, and its
obscurity, was rather like a larger dog-kennel. Mr. Lorry, the
passenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle of
shaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was rather like a larger
sort of dog.

  "There will be a packet to Calais, to-morrow, drawer?"

  "Yes, sir, if the weather holds and the wind sets tolerable fair.
The tide will serve pretty nicely at about two in the afternoon,
sir. Bed, sir?"

  "I shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a
barber."

  "And then breakfast, sir? Yes, sir. That way, sir, if you please.
Show Concord! Gentleman's valise and hot water to Concord. Pull off
gentleman's boots in Concord. (You will find a fine sea-coal fire,
sir.) Fetch barber to Concord. Stir about there, now, for Concord!"

  The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by
the mail, and passengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up
from head to foot, the room had the odd interest for the establishment
of the Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to
go into it, all kinds and varieties of men came out of it.
Consequently, another drawer, and two porters, and several maids and
the landlady, were an loitering by accident at various points of the
road between the Concord and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of
sixty, formally dressed in a brown suit of clothes, pretty well
worn. but very well kept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to
the pockets, passed along on his way to his breakfast.

  The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than the
gentleman in brown. His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire, and
as he sat, with its light shining on him, waiting for the meal, he sat
so still, that he might have been sitting for his portrait.

  Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and
a loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waistcoat, as
though it pitted its gravity and longevity against the levity and
evanescence of the brisk fire. He had a good leg, and was a little
vain of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and were
of a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, were
trim. He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting very close
to his head: which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair, but
which looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of silk or
glass. His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance with his
stockings, was as white as the tops of the waves that broke upon the
neighbouring beach, or the specks of sail that glinted in the sunlight
far at sea. A face habitually suppressed and quieted, was still
lighted up under the quaint wig by a pair of moist bright eyes that it
must have cost their owner, in years gone by, some pains to drill to
the composed and reserved expression of Tellson's Bank. He had a
healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined, bore few
traces of anxiety. But, perhaps the confidential bachelor clerks in
Tellson's Bank were principally occupied with the cares of other
people; and perhaps second-hand cares, like second-hand clothes,
come easily off and on.

  Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his
portrait, Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep. The arrival of his breakfast
roused him, and he said to the drawer, as he moved his chair to it:

  "I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at
any time to-day. She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only ask
for a gentleman from Tellson's Bank. Please to let me know."

  "Yes, sir. Tellson's Bank in London, sir?"

  "Yes."

  "Yes, sir. We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemen
in their travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris,
sir. A vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company's House."

  "Yes. We are quite a French House, as well as an English one."

  "Yes, sir. Not much in the habit of such travelling yourself, I
think, sir?"

  "Not of late years. It is fifteen years since we-since I- came
last from France."

  "Indeed, sir? That was before my time here, sir. Before our people's
time here, sir. The George was in other hands at that time, sir."

  "I believe so."

  "But I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson and
Company was flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteen
years ago?"

  "You might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be
far from the truth."

  "Indeed, sir!"

  Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from
the table, the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his
left, dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying the
guest while he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower.
According to the immemorial usage of waiters in all ages.

  When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a
stroll on the beach. The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid
itself away from the beach, and ran its head into the chalk cliffs,
like a marine ostrich. The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and
stones tumbling wildly about, and the sea did what it liked, and
what it liked was destruction. It thundered at the town, and thundered
at the cliffs, and brought the coast down, madly. The air among the
houses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might have
supposed sick fish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people went
down to be dipped in the sea. A little fishing was done in the port,
and a quantity of strolling about by night, and looking seaward:
particularly at those times when the tide made, and was near flood.
Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimes unaccountably
realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in the
neighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.

  As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had
been at intervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen,
became again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry's thoughts seemed
to cloud too. When it was dark, and he sat before the coffee-room
fire, awaiting his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast, his mind
was busily digging, digging, digging, in the live red coals.

  A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red
coals no harm, otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of
work. Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured out his
last glassful of wine with as complete an appearance of satisfaction
as is ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of a fresh complexion
who has got to the end of a bottle, when a rattling of wheels came
up the narrow street, and rumbled into the inn-yard.

  He set down his glass untouched. "This is Mam'selle!" said he.

  In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that Miss
Manette had arrived from London, and would be happy to see the
gentleman from Tellson's.

  "So soon?"

  Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and required
none then, and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman from
Tellson's immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience.

  The gentleman from Tellson's had nothing left for it but to empty
his glass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little
flaxen wig at the ears, and follow the waiter to Miss Manette's
apartment. It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner
with black horsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables. These had
been oiled and oiled, until the two tall candles on the table in the
middle of the room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if they
were buried, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak
of could be expected from them until they were dug out.

  The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry,
picking his way over the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed Miss
Manette to be, for the moment, in some adjacent room, until, having
got past the two tall candles, he saw standing to receive him by the
table between them and the fire, a young lady of not more than
seventeen in a riding-cloak, and still holding her straw
travelling-hat by its ribbon in her band. As his eyes rested on a
short, slight, pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of
blue eyes that met his own with an inquiring look, and a forehead with
a singular capacity (remembering how young and smooth it was), of
lifting and knitting itself into an expression that was not quite
one of perplexity, or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright fixed
attention, though it included all the four expressions- as his eyes
rested on these things, a sudden vivid likeness passed before him,
of a child whom he had held in his arms on the passage across that
very Channel, one cold time, when the hail drifted heavily and the sea
ran high. The likeness passed away, like a breath along the surface of
the gaunt pier-glass behind her, on the frame of which, a hospital
procession of negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were
offering black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of the
feminine gender- and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.

  "Pray take a seat, sir." In a very clear and pleasant young voice; a
little foreign in its accent, but a very little indeed.

  "I kiss your hand, miss," said Mr. Lorry, with the manners of an
earlier date, as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat.

  "I received a letter from the Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me
that some intelligence- or discovery--"

  "The word is not material, miss; either word will do."

   "-respecting the small property of my poor father, whom I never
saw- so long dead-"

  Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards the
hospital procession of negro cupids. As if they had any help for
anybody in their absurd baskets!

  "-rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there to
communicate with a gentleman of the Bank, so good as to be
despatched to Paris for the purpose."

  "Myself."

  "As I was prepared to hear, sir."

  She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days),
with a pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older and
wiser he was than she. He made her another bow.

  "I replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by
those who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should
go to France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who
could go with me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to
place myself, during the journey, under that worthy gentleman's
protection. The gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was
sent after him to be, the favour of his waiting for me here."

  "I was happy," said Mr. Lorry, "to be entrusted with the charge. I
shall be more happy to execute it."

  "Sir, I thank you indeed. I thank you very gratefully. It was told
me by the Bank that the gentleman would explain to me the details of
the business, and that I must prepare myself to find them of a
surprising nature. I have done my best to prepare myself, and I
naturally have a strong and eager interest to know what they are."

  "Naturally," said Mr. Lorry. "Yes- I--"

  After a pause, he added, again settling the crisp flaxen wig at
the ears,

  "It is very difficult to begin."

  He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance. The
young forehead lifted itself into that singular expression- but it was
pretty and characteristic, besides being singular- and she raised
her hand, as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayed
some passing shadow.

  "Are you quite a stranger to me, sir?"

  "Am I not?" Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended them outwards
with an argumentative smile.

  Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the
line of which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, the
expression deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in the
chair by which she had hitherto remained standing. He watched her as
she mused, and the moment she raised her eyes again, went on:

  "In your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than address
you as a young English lady, Miss Manette?"

  "If you please, sir."

  Miss Manette, I am a man of business. I have a business charge to
acquit myself of. In your reception of it, don't heed me any more than
if I was a speaking machine- truly, I am not much else. I will, with
your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one of our customers."

  "Story!"

  He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when he
added, in a hurry, "Yes, customers; in the banking business we usually
call our connection our customers. He was a French gentleman; a
scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements- a Doctor."

  "Not of Beauvais?"

  Why, yes, of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the
gentleman was of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the
gentleman was of repute in Paris. I had the honour of knowing him
there. Our relations were business relations, but confidential. I
was at that time in our French House, and had been- oh! twenty years."

  "At that time- I may ask, at what time, sir?"

  "I speak, miss, of twenty years ago. He married- an English lady-
and I was one of the trustees. His affairs, like the affairs of many
other French gentlemen and French families, were entirely in Tellson's
hands. In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee of one kind or
other for scores of our customers. These are mere business
relations, miss; there is no friendship in them, no particular
interest, nothing like sentiment. I have passed from one to another,
in the course of my business life, just as I pass from one of our
customers to another in the course of my business day; in short, I
have no feelings; I am a mere machine. To go on--"

  "But this is my father's story, sir; and I begin to think"- the
curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him- "that when I
was left an orphan through my mother's surviving my father only two
years, it was you who brought me to England. I am almost sure it was
you."

  Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly
advanced to take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips. He
then conducted the young lady straightway to her chair again, and,
holding the chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by
turns to rub his chin, pull his wig at the ears, or point what he
said, stood looking down into her face while she sat looking up into
his.

  "Miss Manette, it was I. And you will see how truly I spoke of
myself just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all the
relations I hold with my fellow-creatures are mere business relations,
when you reflect that I have never seen you since. No; you have been
the ward of Tellson's House since, and I have been busy with the other
business of Tellson's House since. Feelings! I have no time for
them, no chance of them. I pass my whole life, miss, in turning an
immense pecuniary Mangle."

  After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr.
Lorry flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which
was most unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining
surface was before), and resumed his former attitude.

  "So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of your
regretted father. Now comes the difference. If your father had not
died when he did-- Don't be frightened! How you start!"

  She did, indeed, start. And she caught his wrist with both her
hands.

  "Pray," said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand
from the back of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers
that clasped him in so violent a tremble: "pray control your
agitation- a matter of business. As I was saying--"

  Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began
anew:

  "As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had
suddenly and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away; if it
had not been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, though no
art could trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot who could
exercise a privilege that I in my own time have known the boldest
people afraid to speak of in a whisper, across the water there; for
instance, the privilege of filling up blank forms for the
consignment of any one to the oblivion of a prison for any length of
time; if his wife had implored the king, the queen, the queen, the
court, the clergy, for any tidings of him, and all quite in vain;-
then the history of your father would have been the history of this
unfortunate gentleman, the Doctor of Beauvais."

  "I entreat you to tell me more, sir."

  "I will. I am going to. You can bear it?"

  "I can bear anything but the uncertainty you leave me in at this
moment."

  "You speak collectedly, and you- are collected. That's good!"
(Though his manner was less satisfied than his words.) "A matter of
business. Regard it as a matter of business- business that must be
done. Now if this doctor's wife, though a lady of great courage and
spirit, had suffered so intensely from this cause before her little
child was born--"

  "The little child was a daughter, sir."

  "A daughter. A- a- matter of business- don't be distressed. Miss, if
the poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little child was
born, that she came to the determination of sparing the poor child the
inheritance of any part of the agony she had known the pains of, by
rearing her in the belief that her father was dead-- No, don't
kneel! In Heaven's name why should you kneel to me!"

  "For the truth. O dear, good, compassionate sir, for the truth!"

  "A- a matter of business. You confuse me, and how can I transact
business if I am confused? Let us be clear-headed. If you could kindly
mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are, or how
many shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging. I should
be so much more at my ease about your state of mind."

  Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when
he had very gently raised her, and the hands that had not ceased to
clasp his wrists were so much more steady than they had been, that she
communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry.

  "That's right, that's right. Courage! Business! You have business
before you; useful business. Miss Manette, your mother took this
course with you. And when she died- I believe broken-hearted- having
never slackened her unavailing search for your father, she left you,
at two years old, to grow to be blooming, beautiful, and happy,
without the dark cloud upon you of living in uncertainty whether
your father soon wore his heart out in prison, or wasted there through
many lingering years."

  As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on the
flowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have
been already tinged with grey.

  "You know that your parents had no great possession, and that what
they had was secured to your mother and to you. There has been no
new discovery, of money, or of any other property; but--"

  He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped. The expression in the
forehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which
was now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror.

  "But he has been- been found. He is alive. Greatly changed, it is
too probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope
the best. Still, alive. Your father has been taken to the house of
an old servant in Paris, and we are going there: I, to identify him if
I can: you, to restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort."

  A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his. She said,
in a low, distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in
a dream,

  "I am going to see his Ghost! It will be his Ghost- not him!"

  Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm. "There, there,
there! See now, see now! The best and the worst are known to you, now.
You are well on your way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a
fair sea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear
side."

  She repeated in the same tone, sunk to a whisper, "I have been free,
I have been happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!"

  "Only one thing more," said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a
wholesome means of enforcing her attention: "he has been found under
another name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed. It would be
worse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seek to
know whether he has been for years overlooked, or always designedly
held prisoner. It would be worse than useless now to make any
inquiries, because it would be dangerous. Better not to mention the
subject, anywhere or in any way, and to remove him- for a while at all
events- out of France. Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even
Tellson's, important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of
the matter. I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly
referring to it. This is a secret service altogether. My
credentials, entries, and memoranda, are all comprehended in the one
line, 'Recalled to Life;' which may mean anything. But what is the
matter! She doesn't notice a word! Miss Manette!"

  Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair,
she sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and
fixed upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it were
carved or branded into her forehead. So close was her hold upon his
arm, that he feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her;
therefore he called out loudly for assistance without moving.

  A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed
to be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed
in some extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a
most wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and good
measure too, or a great Stilton cheese, came running into the room
in advance of the inn servants, and soon settled the question of his
detachment from the poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon
his chest, and sending him flying back against the nearest wall.

  ("I really think this must be a man!" was Mr. Lorry's breathless
reflection, simultaneously with his coming against the wall.)

  "Why, look at you all!" bawled this figure, addressing the inn
servants. "Why don't you go and fetch things, instead of standing
there staring at me? I am not so much to look at, am I? Why don't
you go and fetch things? I'll let you know, if you don't bring
smelling-salts, cold water, and quick, I will."

  There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and she
softly laid the patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill and
gentleness: calling her "my precious!" and "my bird!" and spreading
her golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care.

  "And you in brown!" she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry;
"couldn't you tell her what you had to tell her, without frightening
her to death? Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold
hands. Do you call that being a Banker?"

  Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to
answer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler
sympathy and humility, while the strong woman, having banished the inn
servants under the mysterious penalty of "letting them know" something
not mentioned if they stayed there, staring, recovered her charge by a
regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay her drooping
head upon her shoulder.

  "I hope she will do well now," said Mr. Lorry.

  "No thanks to you in brown, if she does. My darling pretty!"

  "I hope," said Mr. Lorry, after another pause of feeble sympathy and
humility, "that you accompany Miss Manette to France?"

  "A likely thing, too!" replied the strong woman. "If it was ever
intended that I should go across salt water, do you suppose Providence
would have cast my lot in an island?"

  This being another question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry
withdrew to consider it.

  V

  THE WINE-SHOP

  A LARGE CASK of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street. The
accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask had
tumbled out with a run, the hoops had burst, and it lay on the
stones just outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like a
walnut-shell.

  All the people within reach had suspended their business, or their
idleness, to run to the spot and drink the wine. The rough,
irregular stones of the street, pointing every way, and designed,
one might have thought, expressly to lame all living creatures that
approached them, had dammed it into little pools; these were
surrounded, each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to
its size. Some men kneeled down, made scoops of their two hands
joined, and sipped, or tried to help women, who bent over their
shoulders, to sip, before the wine had all run out between their
fingers. Others, men and women, dipped in the puddles with little mugs
of mutilated earthenware, or even with handkerchiefs from women's
heads, which were squeezed dry into infants' mouths; others made small
mud-embankments, to stern the wine as it ran; others, directed by
lookers-on up at high windows, darted here and there, to cut off
little streams of wine that started away in new directions; others
devoted themselves to the sodden and lee-dyed pieces of the cask,
licking, and even champing the moister wine-rotted fragments with
eager relish. There was no drainage to carry off the wine, and not
only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up along
with it, that there might have been a scavenger in the street, if
anybody acquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous
presence.

  A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices- voices of men,
women, and children- resounded in the street while this wine game
lasted. There was little roughness in the sport, and much playfulness.
There was a special companionship in it, an observable inclination
on the part of every one to join some other one, which led, especially
among the luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces, drinking
of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands and dancing, a
dozen together. When the wine was gone, and the places where it had
been most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by fingers,
these demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had broken out. The
man who had left his saw sticking in the firewood he was cutting,
set it in motion again; the women who had left on a door-step the
little pot of hot ashes, at which she had been trying to soften the
pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in those of her child,
returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverous
faces, who had emerged into the winter light from cellars, moved away,
to descend again; and a gloom gathered on the scene that appeared more
natural to it than sunshine.

  The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrow
street in the suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was spilled.
It had stained many hands, too, and many faces, and many naked feet,
and many wooden shoes. The hands of the man who sawed the wood, left
red marks on the billets; and the forehead of the woman who nursed her
baby, was stained with the stain of the old rag she wound about her
head again. Those who had been greedy with the staves of the cask, had
acquired a tigerish smear about the mouth; and one tall joker so
besmirched, his head more out of a long squalid bag of a nightcap than
in it, scrawled upon a wall with his finger dipped in muddy wine-lees-
BLOOD.

  The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on the
street-stones, and when the stain of it would be red upon many there.

  And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary
gleam had driven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it was
heavy- cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords in
waiting on the saintly presence- nobles of great power all of them;
but, most especially the last. Samples of a people that had
undergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in the mill, and
certainly not in the fabulous mill which ground old people young,
shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, looked
from every window, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that the
wind shook. The mill which had worked them down, was the mill that
grinds young people old; the children had ancient faces and grave
voices; and upon them, and upon the grown faces, and ploughed into
every furrow of age and coming up afresh, was the sigh, Hunger. It was
prevalent everywhere. Hunger was pushed out of the tall houses, in the
wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger was patched
into them with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger was repeated
in every fragment of the small modicum of firewood that the man
sawed off; Hunger stared down from the smokeless chimneys, and started
up from the filthy street that had no offal, among its refuse, of
anything to eat. Hunger was the inscription on the baker's shelves,
written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of bad bread; at the
sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that was offered for sale.
Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roasting chestnuts in the
turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomies in every farthing
porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with some reluctant drops of
oil.

  Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it. A narrow winding
street, full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding
streets diverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling
of rags and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look
upon them that looked ill. In the hunted air of the people there was
yet some wild-beast thought of the possibility of turning at bay.
Depressed and slinking though they were, eyes of fire were not wanting
among them; nor compressed lips, white with what they suppressed;
nor foreheads knitted into the likeness of the gallows-rope they mused
about enduring, or inflicting. The trade sips (and they were almost as
many as the shops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want. The
butcher and the porkman painted up, only the leanest scrags of meat;
the baker, the coarsest of meagre loaves. The people rudely pictured
as drinking in the wine-shops, croaked over their scanty measures of
thin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidential together.
Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools and
weapons; but, the cutler's knives and axes were sharp and bright,
the smith's hammers were heavy, and the gunmaker's stock was
murderous. The crippling stones of the pavement, with their many
little reservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but broke off
abruptly at the doors. The kennel, to make amends, ran down the middle
of the street- when it ran at all: which was only after heavy rains,
and then it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses. Across the
streets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and
pulley; at night, when the lamplighter had let these down, and
lighted, and hoisted them again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung
in a sickly manner overhead, as if they were at sea. Indeed they
were at sea, and the ship and crew were in peril of tempest.

  For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that
region should have watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and
hunger, so long, as to conceive the idea of improving on his method,
and hauling up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon the
darkness of their condition. But, the time was not come yet; and every
wind that blew over France shook the rags of the scarecrows in vain,
for the birds, fine of song and feather, took no warning.

  The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in its
appearance and degree, and the master of the wine-shop had stood
outside it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on at
the struggle for the lost wine. "It's not my affair," said he, with
a final shrug of the shoulders. "The people from the market did it.
Let them bring another."

  There, his eyes happening to catch the tall joker writing up his
joke, he called to him across the way:

  "Say, then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?"

  The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is
often the way with his tribe. It missed its mark, and completely
failed, as is often the way with his tribe too.

  "What now? Are you a subject for the mad hospital?" said the
wineshop keeper, crossing the road, and obliterating the jest with a
handful of mud, picked up for the purpose, and smeared over it. "Why
do you write in the public streets? Is there- tell me thou- is there
no other place to write such words in?"

  In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps
accidentally, perhaps not) upon the joker's heart. The joker rapped it
with his own, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a
fantastic dancing attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off
his foot into his hand, and held out. A joker of an extremely, not
to say wolfishly practical character, he looked, under those
circumstances.

  "Put it on, put it on," said the other. "Call wine, wine; and finish
there." With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the joker's
dress, such as it was- quite deliberately, as having dirtied the
hand on his account; and then recrossed the road and entered the
wine-shop.

  This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of
thirty, and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, although it
was a bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over his
shoulder. His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown arms
were bare to the elbows. Neither did he wear anything more on his head
than his own crisply-curling short dark hair. He was a dark man
altogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them.
Good-humoured looking on the whole, but implacable-looking, too;
evidently a man of a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man not
desirable to be met, rushing down a narrow pass with a gulf on
either side, for nothing would turn the man.

  Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as he
came in. Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with a
watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand
heavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composure of
manner. There was a character about Madame Defarge, from which one
might have predicated that she did not often make mistakes against
herself in any of the reckonings over which she presided. Madame
Defarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a
quantity of bright shawl twined about her head, though not to the
concealment of her large ear-rings. Her knitting was before her, but
she had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick. Thus engaged,
with her right elbow supported by her left hand, Madame Defarge said
nothing when her lord came in, but coughed just one grain of cough.
This, in combination with the lifting of her darkly defined eyebrows
over her toothpick by the breadth of a line, suggested to her
husband that he would do well to look round the shop among the
customers, for any new customer who had dropped in while he stepped
over the way.

  The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until they
rested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated
in a corner. Other company were there: two playing cards, two playing
dominoes, three standing by the counter lengthening out a short supply
of wine. As he passed behind the counter, he took notice that the
elderly gentleman said in a look to the young lady, "This is our man."

  "What the devil do you do in that galley there?" said Monsieur
Defarge to himself; "I don't know you."

  But, he feigned not to notice the two strangers, and fell into
discourse with the triumvirate of customers who were drinking at the
counter.

  "How goes it, Jacques?" said one of these three to Monsieur Defarge.
"Is all the spilt wine swallowed?"

  "Every drop, Jacques," answered Monsieur Defarge.

  When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame
Defarge, picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain
of cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.

  "It is not often," said the second of the three, addressing Monsieur
Defarge, "that many of these miserable beasts know the taste of
wine, or of anything but black bread and death. Is it not so,
Jacques?"

  "It is so, Jacques," Monsieur Defarge returned.

  At this second interchange of the Christian name, Madame Defarge,
still using her toothpick with profound composure, coughed another
grain of cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another
line.

  The last of the three now said his say, as he put down his empty
drinking vessel and smacked his lips.

  "Ah! So much the worse! A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle
always have in their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques. Am I
right, Jacques?"

  "You are right, Jacques," was the response of Monsieur Defarge.

  This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at the
moment when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows up,
and slightly rustled in her seat.

  "Hold then! True!" muttered her husband. "Gentlemen- my wife!"

  The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, with
three flourishes. She acknowledged their homage by bending her head,
and giving them a quick look. Then she glanced in a casual manner
round the wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparent calmness
and repose of spirit, and became absorbed in it.

  "Gentlemen," said her husband, who had kept his bright eye
observantly upon her, "good day. The chamber, furnished
bachelor-fashion, that you wished to see, and were inquiring for
when I stepped out, is on the fifth floor. The doorway of the
staircase gives on the little courtyard close to the left here,"
pointing with his hand, "near to the window of my establishment.
But, now that I remember, one of you has already been there, and can
show the way. Gentlemen, adieu!"

  They paid for their wine, and left the place. The eyes of Monsieur
Defarge were studying his wife at her knitting when the elderly
gentleman advanced from his corner, and begged the favour of a word.

  "Willingly, sir," said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with
him to the door.

  Their conference was very short, but very decided. Almost at the
first word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive. It
had not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out. The gentleman
then beckoned to the young lady, and they, too, went out. Madame
Defarge knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, and saw
nothing.

  Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus,
joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed his
own company just before. It opened from a stinking little black
courtyard, and was the general public entrance to a great pile of
houses, inhabited by a great number of people. In the gloomy
tile-paved entry to the gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur
Defarge bent down on one knee to the child of his old master, and
put her hand to his lips. It was a gentle action, but not at all
gently done; a very remarkable transformation had come over him in a
few seconds. He had no good-humour in his face, nor any openness of
aspect left, but had become a secret, angry, dangerous man.

  "It is very high; it is a little difficult. Better to begin slowly."
Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they
began ascending the stairs.

  "Is he alone?" the latter whispered.

  "Alone! God help him, who should be with him!" said the other, in
the same low voice.

  "Is he always alone, then?"

  "Yes."

  "Of his own desire?"

  "Of his own necessity. As he was, when I first saw him after they
found me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril be
discreet- as he was then, so he is now."

  "He is greatly changed?"

  "Changed!"

  The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his
hand, and mutter a tremendous curse. No direct answer could have
been half so forcible. Mr. Lorry's spirits grew heavier and heavier,
as he and his two companions ascended higher and higher.

  Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more
crowded parts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it
was vile indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses. Every little
habitation within the great foul nest of one high building- that is to
say, the room or rooms within every door that opened on the general
staircase- left its own heap of refuse on its own landing, besides
flinging other refuse from its own windows. The uncontrollable and
hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted
the air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with
their intangible impurities; the two bad sources combined made it
almost insupportable. Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark
shaft of dirt and poison, the way lay. Yielding to his own disturbance
of mind, and to his young companion's agitation, which became
greater every instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest. Each of
these stoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any
languishing good airs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape,
and all spoilt and sickly vapours seemed to crawl in. Through the
rusted bars, tastes, rather than glimpses, were caught of the
jumbled neighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer or lower
than the summits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any
promise on it of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.

  At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped for
the third time. There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper
inclination and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before the
garret story was reached. The keeper of the wine-shop, always going
a little in advance, and always going on the side which Mr. Lorry
took, as though he dreaded to be asked any question by the young lady,
turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in the pockets of
the coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key.

  "The door is locked then, my friend?" said Mr. Lorry, surprised.

  "Ay. Yes," was the grim reply of Monsieur Defarge.

  "You think it necessary to keep the unfortunate gentleman so
retired?"

  "I think it necessary to turn the key." Monsieur Defarge whispered
it closer in his ear, and frowned heavily.

  "Why?"

  "Why! Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would be
frightened- rave- tear himself to pieces- die- come to I know not what
harm- if his door was left open."

  "Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Lorry.

  "Is it possible!" repeated Defarge, bitterly. "Yes. And a
beautiful world we live in, when it is possible, and when many other
such things are possible, and not only possible, but done- done, see
you!- under that sky there, every day. Long live the Devil. Let us
go on."

  This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a
word of it had reached the young lady's ears. But, by this time she
trembled under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deep
anxiety, and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt it
incumbent on him to speak a word or two of reassurance.

  "Courage, dear miss! Courage! Business! The worst will be over in
a moment; it is but passing the room-door, and the worst is over.
Then, all the good you bring to him, all the relief, all the happiness
you bring to him, begin. Let our good friend here, assist you on
that side. That's well, friend Defarge. Come, now. Business,
business!"

  They went up slowly and softly. The staircase was short, and they
were soon at the top. There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, they came
all at once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent down close
together at the side of a door, and who were intently looking into the
room to which the door belonged, through some chinks or holes in the
wall. On hearing footsteps close at hand, these three turned, and
rose, and showed themselves to be the three of one name who had been
drinking in the wine-shop.

  "I forgot them in the surprise of your visit," explained Monsieur
Defarge. "Leave us, good boys; we have business here."

  The three glided by, and went silently down.

  There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper of
the wine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone,
Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:

  "Do you make a show of Monsieur Manette?"

  "I show him, in the way you have seen, to a chosen few."

  "Is that well?"

  "I think it is well."

  "Who are the few? How do you choose them?"

  "I choose them as real men, of my name- Jacques is my name- to
whom the sight is likely to do good. Enough; you are English; that
is another thing. Stay there, if you please, a little moment."

  With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and looked
in through the crevice in the wall. Soon raising his head again, he
struck twice or thrice upon the door- evidently with no other object
than to make a noise there. With the same intention, he drew the key
across it, three or four times, before he put it clumsily into the
lock, and turned it as heavily as he could.

  The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into the
room and said something. A faint voice answered something. Little more
than a single syllable could have been spoken on either side.

  He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter. Mr.
Lorry got his arm securely round the daughter's waist, and held her;
for he felt that she was sinking.

  "A- a- a- business, business!" he urged, with a moisture that was
not of business shining on his cheek. "Come in, come in!"

  "I am afraid of it," she answered, shuddering.

  "Of it? What?"

  "I mean of him. Of my father."

  Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning of
their conductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon his
shoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into the room. He sat
her down just within the door, and held her, clinging to him.

  Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the
inside, took out the key again, and held it in his hand. All this he
did, methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of
noise as he could make. Finally, he walked across the room with a
measured tread to where the window was. He stopped there, and faced
round.

  The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like,
was dim and dark: for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door
in the roof, with a little crane over it for the hoisting up of stores
from the street: unglazed, and closing up the middle in two pieces,
like any other door of French construction. To exclude the cold, one
half of this door was fast closed, and the other was opened but a very
little way. Such a scanty portion of light was admitted through
these means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to see
anything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one,
the ability to do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity. Yet,
work of that kind was being done in the garret; for, with his back
towards the door, and his face towards the window where the keeper
of the wine-shop stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a low
bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.

  VI

  THE SHOEMAKER

  "GOOD DAY!" said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at the white bead
that bent low over the shoemaking.

  It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to
the salutation, as if it were at a distance:

  "Good day!"

  "You are still hard at work, I see?"

  After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and
the voice replied, "Yes- I am working." This time, a pair of haggard
eyes had looked at the questioner, before the face had dropped again.

  The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful. It was not the
faintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no
doubt had their part in it. Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it
was the faintness of solitude and disuse. It was like the last
feeble echo of a sound made long and long ago. So entirely had it lost
the life and resonance of the human voice, that it affected the senses
like a once beautiful colour faded away into a poor weak stain. So
sunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voice underground. So
expressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature, that a famished
traveller, wearied out by lonely wandering in a wilderness, would have
remembered home and friends in such a tone before lying down to die.

  Some minutes of silent work had passed: and the haggard eyes had
looked up again: not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull
mechanical perception, beforehand, that the spot where the only
visitor they were aware of had stood, was not yet empty.

  "I want," said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from the
shoemaker, "to let in a little more light here. You can bear a
little more?"

  The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of
listening, at the floor on one side of him; then similarly, at the
floor on the other side of him; then, upward at the speaker.

  "What did you say?"

  "You can bear a little more light?"

  "I must bear it, if you let it in." (Laying the palest shadow of a
stress upon the second word.)

  The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at
that angle for the time. A broad ray of light fell into the garret,
and showed the workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing
in his labour. His few common tools and various scraps of leather were
at his feet and on his bench. He had a white beard, raggedly cut,
but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes. The
hollowness and thinness of his face would have caused them to look
large, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair, though
they had been really otherwise; but, they were naturally large, and
looked unnaturally so. His yellow rags of shirt lay open at the
throat, and showed his body to be withered and worn. He, and his old
canvas frock, and his loose stockings, and all his poor tatters of
clothes, had, in a long seclusion from direct light and air, faded
down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow, that it would have
been hard to say which was which.

  He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the very
bones of it seemed transparent. So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant
gaze, pausing in his work. He never looked at the figure before him,
without first looking down on this side of himself, then on that, as
if he had lost the habit of associating place with sound; he never
spoke, without first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to
speak.

  "Are you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?" asked
Defarge, motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward.

  "What did you say?"

  "Do you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?"

  "I can't say that I mean to. I suppose so. I don't know."

  But, the question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it
again.

  Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door.
When he had stood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, the
shoemaker looked up. He showed no surprise at seeing another figure,
but the unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips as he
looked at it (his lips and his nails were of the same pale
lead-colour), and then the hand dropped to his work, and he once
more bent over the shoe. The look and the action had occupied but an
instant.

  "You have a visitor, you see," said Monsieur Defarge.

  "What did you say?"

  "Here is a visitor."

  The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand
from his work.

  "Come!" said Defarge. "Here is monsieur, who knows a well-made
shoe when he sees one. Show him that shoe you are working at. Take it,
monsieur."

  Mr. Lorry took it in his hand.

  Tell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and the maker's name."

  There was a longer pause than usual, before the shoemaker replied:

  "I forget what it was you asked me. What did you say?"

  "I said, couldn't you describe the kind of shoe, for monsieur's
information?"

  "It is a lady's shoe. It is a young lady's walking-shoe. It is in
the present mode. I never saw the mode. I have had a pattern in my
hand." He glanced at the shoe with some little passing touch of pride.

  "And the maker's name?" said Defarge.

  Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right
hand in the hollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand
in the hollow of the right, and then passed a hand across his
bearded chin, and so on in regular changes, without a moment's
intermission. The task of recalling him from the vagrancy into which
he always sank when he had spoken, was like recalling some very weak
person from a swoon, or endeavouring, in the hope of some
disclosure, to stay the spirit of a fast-dying man.

  "Did you ask me for my name?"

  "Assuredly I did."

  "One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

  "Is that all?"

  "One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

  With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to work
again, until the silence was again broken.

  "You are not a shoemaker by trade?" said Mr. Lorry, looking
steadfastly at him.

  His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred
the question to him: but as no help came from that quarter, they
turned back on the questioner when they had sought the ground.

  "I am not a shoemaker by trade? No, I was not a shoemaker by
trade. I- I learnt it here. I taught myself. I asked leave to--"

  He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes
on his hands the whole time. His eyes came slowly back, at last, to
the face from which they had wandered; when they rested on it, he
started, and resumed, in the manner of a sleeper that moment awake,
reverting to a subject of last night.

  "I asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficulty
after a long while, and I have made shoes ever since."

  As he held out his hand for the shoe that had been taken from him,
Mr. Lorry said, still looking steadfastly in his face:

  "Monsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?"

  The shoe dropped to the ground, and he sat looking fixedly at the
questioner.

  "Monsieur Manette"; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge's arm;
"do you remember nothing of this man? Look at him. Look at me. Is
there no old banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time,
rising in your mind, Monsieur Manette?"

  As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at Mr.
Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively
intent intelligence in the middle of the forehead, gradually forced
themselves through the black mist that had fallen on him. They were
overclouded again, they were fainter, they were gone; but they had
been there. And so exactly was the expression repeated on the fair
young face of her who had crept along the wall to a point where she
could see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with hands
which at first had been only raised in frightened compassion, if not
even to keep him off and shut out the sight of him, but which were now
extending towards him, trembling with eagerness to lay the spectral
face upon her warm young breast, and love it back to life and hope- so
exactly was the expression repeated (though in stronger characters) on
her fair young face, that it looked as though it had passed like a
moving light, from him to her.

  Darkness had fallen on him in its place. He looked at the two,
less and less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought
the ground and looked about him in the old way. Finally, with a deep
long sigh, he took the shoe up, and resumed his work.

  "Have you recognised him, monsieur?" asked Defarge in a whisper.

  "Yes; for a moment. At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I have
unquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knew so
well. Hush! Let us draw further back. Hush!"

  She had moved from the wall of the garret. very near to the bench on
which he sat. There was something awful in his unconsciousness of
the figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as he
stooped over his labour.

  Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made. She stood, like a
spirit, beside him, and he bent over his work.

  It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the
instrument in his hand, for his shoemaker's knife. It lay on that side
of him which was not the side on which she stood. He had taken it
up, and was stooping to work again, when his eyes caught the skirt
of her dress. He raised them, and saw her face. The two spectators
started forward, but she stayed them with a motion of her hand. She
had no fear of his striking at her with the knife, though they had.

  He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips
began to form some words, though no sound proceeded from them. By
degrees, in the pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he was
heard to say:

  "What is this?"

  With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her
lips, and kissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as if
she laid his ruined head there.

  "You are not the gaoler's daughter?"

  She sighed "No."

  "Who are you?"

  Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the bench
beside him. He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm. A strange
thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed over his
frame; he laid the knife down softly, as he sat staring at her.

  Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly
pushed aside, and fell down over her neck. Advancing his hand by
little and little, he took it up and looked at it. In the midst of the
action he went astray, and, with another deep sigh, fell to work at
his shoemaking.

  But not for long. Releasing his ann, she laid her hand upon his
shoulder. After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if to
be sure that it was really there, he laid down his work, put his
hand to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap of
folded rag attached to it. He opened this, carefully, on his knee, and
it contained a very little quantity of hair: not more than one or
two long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off upon
his finger.

  He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it.
"It is the same. How can it be! When was it! How was it!"

  As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed
to become conscious that it was in hers too. He turned her full to the
light, and looked at her.

  "She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was
summoned out- she had a fear of my going, though I had none- and
when I was brought to the North Tower they found these upon my sleeve.
'You will leave me them? They can never help me to escape in the body,
though they may in the spirit.' Those were the words I said. I
remember them very well."

  He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter
it. But when he did find spoken words for it, they came to him
coherently, though slowly.

  "How was this?- Was it you?"

  Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with
a frightful suddenness. But she sat perfectly still in his grasp,
and only said, in a low voice, "I entreat you, good gentlemen, do
not come near us, do not speak, do not move!"

  "Hark!" he exclaimed. "Whose voice was that?"

  His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his
white hair, which they tore in a frenzy. It died out, as everything
but his shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his little
packet and tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked at
her, and gloomily shook his head.

  "No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming. It can't be. See
what the prisoner is. These are not the hands she knew, this is not
the face she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard. No, no. She
was- and He was- before the slow years of the North Tower- ages ago.
What is your name, my gentle angel?"

  Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon her
knees before him, with her appealing hands upon his breast.

  "O, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my mother
was, and who my father, and how I never knew their hard, hard history.
But I cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell you here. All
that I may tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to you to touch
me and to bless me. Kiss me, kiss me! O my dear, my dear!"

  His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed
and lighted it as though it were the light of Freedom shining on him.

  "If you hear in my voice- I don't know that it is so, but I hope
it is- if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once
was sweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it! If you
touch, in touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head
that lay on your breast when you were young and free, weep for it,
weep for it! If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where
I will be true to you with all my duty and with all my faithful
service, I bring back the remembrance of a Home long desolate, while
your poor heart pined away, weep for it, weep for it!"

  She held him closer round the neck, and rocked him on her breast
like a child.

  "If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and
that I have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England
to he at peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life
laid waste, and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it,
weep for it! And if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my
father who is living, and of my mother who is dead, you learn that I
have to kneel to my honoured father, and implore his pardon for having
never for his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all
night, because the love of my poor mother hid his torture from me,
weep for it, weep for it! Weep for her, then, and for me! Good
gentlemen, thank God! I feel his sacred tears upon my face, and his
sobs strike against my heart. O, see! Thank God for us, thank God!"

  He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast: a sight
so touching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and suffering
which had gone before it, that the two beholders covered their faces.

  When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and his
heaving breast and shaken form had long yielded to the calm that
must follow all storms- emblem to humanity, of the rest and silence
into which the storm called Life must hush at last- they came
forward to raise the father and daughter from the ground. He had
gradually dropped to the floor, and lay there in a lethargy, worn out.
She had nestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm;
and her hair drooping over him curtained him from the light.

  "If, without disturbing him," she said, raising her hand to Mr.
Lorry as he stooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose,
"all could be arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from
the very door, he could be taken away--"

  "But, consider. Is he fit for the journey?" asked Mr. Lorry.

  "More fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so
dreadful to him."

  "It is true," said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear.
"More than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of
France. Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?"

  "That's business," said Mr. Lorry, resuming on the shortest notice
his methodical manners; "and if business is to be done, I had better
do it."

  "Then be so kind," urged Miss Manette, "as to leave us here. You see
how composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him with
me now. Why should you be? If you will lock the door to secure us from
interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when you come
back, as quiet as you leave him. In any case, I will take care of
him until you return, and then we will remove him straight."

  Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course,
and in favour of one of them remaining. But, as there were not only
carriage and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as
time pressed, for the day was drawing to an end, it came at last to
their hastily dividing the business that was necessary to be done, and
hurrying away to do it.

  Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down
on the hard ground close at the father's side, and watched him. The
darkness deepened and deepened, and they both lay quiet, until a light
gleamed through the chinks in the wall.

  Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey,
and had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers,
bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put this
provender, and the lamp he carried, on the shoemaker's bench (there
was nothing else in the garret but a pallet bed), and he and Mr. Lorry
roused the captive, and assisted him to his feet.

  No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind,
in the scared blank wonder of his face. Whether he knew what had
happened, whether he recollected what they had said to him, whether he
knew that he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have
solved. They tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so
very slow to answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, and
agreed for the time to tamper with him no more. He had a wild, lost
manner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not
been seen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound
of his daughter's voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.

  In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion,
he ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the
cloak and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear. He readily
responded to his daughter's drawing her arm through his, and took- and
kept- her hand in both his own.

  They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp,
Mr. Lorry closing the little procession. They had not traversed many
steps of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at the
roof and round at the walls.

  "You remember the place, my father? You remember coming up here?"

  "What did you say?"

  But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer
as if she had repeated it.

  "Remember? No, I don't remember. It was so very long ago."

  That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from
his prison to that house, was apparent to them. They heard him mutter,
"One Hundred and Five, North Tower;" and when he looked about him,
it evidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long
encompassed him. On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively
altered his tread, as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when
there was no drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open
street, he dropped his daughter's hand and clasped his head again.

  No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of
the many windows; not even a chance passer-by was in the street. An
unnatural silence and desertion reigned there. Only one soul was to be
seen, and that was Madame Defarge- who leaned against the door-post,
knitting, and saw nothing.

  The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed
him, when Mr. Lorry's feet were arrested on the step by his asking,
miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes. Madame
Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them, and
went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard. She
quickly brought them down and handed them in;- and immediately
afterwards leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.

  Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word "To the Barrier!" The
postilion cracked his whip, and they clattered away under the feeble
overswinging lamps.

  Under the over-swinging lamps- swinging ever brighter in the
better streets, and ever dimmer in the worse- and by lighted shops,
gay crowds, illuminated coffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of
the city gates. Soldiers with lanterns, at the guard-house there.
"Your papers, travellers!" "See here then, Monsieur the Officer," said
Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart, "these are the
papers of monsieur inside, with the white head. They were consigned to
me, with him, at the--" He dropped his voice, there was a flutter
among the military lanterns, and one of them being handed into the
coach by an arm in uniform, the eyes connected with the arm looked,
not an every day or an every night look, at monsieur with the white
head. "It is well. Forward!" from the uniform. "Adieu!" from
Defarge. And so, under a short grove of feebler and feebler
over-swinging lamps, out under the great grove of stars.

  Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote
from this little earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whether
their rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space where
anything is suffered or done: the shadows of the night were broad
and black. All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn,
they once more whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry- sitting
opposite the buried man who had been dug out, and wondering what
subtle powers were for ever lost to him, and what were capable of
restoration- the old inquiry:

  "I hope you care to be recalled to life?"

  And the old answer:

  "I can't say."

                  THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.

                                BOOK THE SECOND

                               THE GOLDEN THREAD

  I

  FIVE YEARS LATER

  TELLSON'S BANK by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in the
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty. It was very small, very
dark, very ugly, very incommodious. It was an old-fashioned place,
moreover, in the moral attribute that the partners in the House were
proud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its
ugliness, proud of its incommodiousness. They were even boastful of
its eminence in those particulars, and were fired by an express
conviction that, if it were less objectionable, it would be less
respectable. This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which
they flashed at more convenient places of business. Tellson's (they
said) wanted no elbow-room, Tellson's wanted no light, Tellson's
wanted no embellishment. Noakes and Co.'s might, or Snooks Brothers'
might; but Tellson's, thank Heaven!--

  Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on the
question of rebuilding Tellson's. In this respect the House was much
on a par with the Country; which did very often disinherit its sons
for suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long been
highly objectionable, but were only the more respectable.

  Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson's was the triumphant
perfection of inconvenience. After bursting open a door of idiotic
obstinacy with a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson's
down two steps, and came to your senses in a miserable little shop,
with two little counters, where the oldest of men made your cheque
shake as if the wind rustled it, while they examined the signature
by the dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath of
mud from Fleet-street, and which were made the dingier by their own
iron bars proper, and the heavy shadow of Temple Bar. If your business
necessitated your seeing "the House," you were put into a species of
Condemned Hold at the back, where you meditated on a misspent life,
until the House came with its hands in its pockets, and you could
hardly bunk at it in the dismal twilight. Your money came out of, or
went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew up your
nose and down your throat when they were opened and shut. Your
bank-notes had a musty odour, as if they were fast decomposing into
rags again. Your plate was stowed away among the neighbouring
cesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good polish in a
day or two. Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms made of
kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out of their
parchments into the banking-house air. Your lighter boxes of family
papers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great
dining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in the year
one thousand seven hundred and eighty, the first letters written to
you by your old love, or by your little children, were but newly
released from the horror of being ogled through the windows, by the
heads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocity
worthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.

  But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in
vogue with all trades and professions, and not least of all with
Tellson's. Death is Nature's remedy for all things, and why not
Legislation's? Accordingly, the forger was put to Death; the utterer
of a bad note was put to Death; the unlawful opener of a letter was
put to Death; the purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to
Death; the holder of a horse at Tellson's door, who made off with
it, was put to Death; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death;
the sounders of three-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of
Crime, were put to Death. Not that it did the least good in the way of
prevention- it might almost have been worth remarking that the fact
was exactly the reverse- but, it cleared off (as to this world) the
trouble of each particular case, and left nothing else connected
with it to be looked after. Thus, Tellson's, in its day, like
greater places of business, its contemporaries, had taken so many
lives, that, if the heads laid low before it had been ranged on Temple
Bar instead of being privately disposed of, they would probably have
excluded what little light the ground floor had, in a rather
significant manner.

  Cramped in all kinds of dim cupboards and hutches at Tellson's the
oldest of men carried on the business gravely. When they took a
young man into Tellson's London house, they hid him somewhere till
he was old. They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he had
the full Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him. Then only was he
permitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, and
casting his breeches and gaiters into the general weight of the
establishment.

  Outside Tellson's- never by any means in it, unless called in- was
an odd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as
the live sign of the house. He was never absent during business hours,
unless upon an errand, and then he was represented by his son: a
grisly urchin of twelve, who was his express image. People
understood that Tellson's, in a stately way, tolerated the
odd-job-man. The house had always tolerated some person in that
capacity, and time and tide had drifted this person to the post. His
surname was Cruncher, and on the youthful occasion of his renouncing
by proxy the works of darkness, in the easterly parish church of
Hounsditch, he had received the added appellation of Jerry.

  The scene was Mr. Cruncher's private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,
Whitefriars: the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy March
morning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty. (Mr. Cruncher
himself always spoke of the year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes:
apparently under the impression that the Christian era dated from
the invention of a popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name
upon it.)

  Mr. Cruncher's apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and
were but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass
in it might be counted as one. But they were very decently kept. Early
as it was, on the windy March morning, the room in which he lay abed
was already scrubbed throughout; and between the cups and saucers
arranged for breakfast, and the lumbering deal table, a very clean
white cloth was spread.

  Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin
at home. At first, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll
and surge in bed, until he rose above the surface, with his spiky hair
looking as if it must tear the sheets to ribbons. At which juncture,
he exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:

  "Bust me, if she ain't at it agin!"

  A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in
a corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was
the person referred to.

  "What!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot. "You're at
it agin, are you?"

  After hailing the morn with this second salutation, he threw a
boot at the woman as a third. It was a very muddy boot, and may
introduce the odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher's
domestic economy, that, whereas he often came home after banking hours
with clean boots, he often got up next morning to find the same
boots covered with clay.

  "What," said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missing
his mark- "what are you up to, Aggerawayter?"

  "I was only saying my prayers."

  "Saying your prayers! You're a nice woman! What do you mean by
flopping yourself down and praying agin me?"

  "I was not praying against you; I was praying for you."

  "You weren't. And if you were, I won't be took the liberty with.
Here! your mother's a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin
your father's prosperity. You've got a dutiful mother, you have, my
son. You've got a religious mother, you have, my boy: going and
flopping herself down, and praying that the bread-and-butter may be
snatched out of the mouth of her only child."

  Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and,
turning to his mother, strongly deprecated any praying away of his
personal board.

  "And what do you suppose, you conceited female," said Mr.
Cruncher, with unconscious inconsistency, "that the worth of your
prayers may be? Name the price that you put your prayers at!"

  "They only come from the heart, Jerry. They are worth no more than
that."

  "Worth no more than that," repeated Mr. Cruncher. "They ain't
worth much, then. Whether or no, I won't be prayed agin, I tell you. I
can't afford it. I'm not a going to be made unlucky by your
sneaking. If you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favour of
your husband and child, and not in opposition to 'em. If I had had any
but a unnat'ral wife, and this poor boy had had any but a unnat'ral
mother, I might have made some money last week instead of being
counter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumvented into
the worst of luck. B-u-u-ust me!" said Mr. Cruncher, who all this time
had been putting on his clothes, "if I ain't, what with piety and
one blowed thing and another, been choused this last week into as
bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honest tradesman met with! Young
Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean my boots keep a eye
upon your mother now and then, and if you see any signs of more
flopping, give me a call. For, I tell you," here he addressed his wife
once more, "I won't be gone agin, in this manner. I am as rickety as a
hackney-coach, I'm as sleepy as laudanum, my lines is strained to that
degree that I shouldn't know, if it wasn't for the pain in 'em,
which was me and which somebody else, yet I'm none the better for it
in pocket; and it's my suspicion that you've been at it from morning
to night to prevent me from being the better for it in pocket, and I
won't put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you say now!"

  Growling, in addition, such phrases as "Ah! yes! You're religious,
too. You wouldn't put yourself in opposition to the interests of
your husband and child, would you? Not you!" and throwing off other
sarcastic sparks from the whirling grindstone of his indignation,
Mr. Cruncher betook himself to his boot-cleaning and his general
preparation for business. In the meantime, his son, whose head was
garnished with tenderer spikes, and whose young eyes stood close by
one another, as his father's did, kept the required watch upon his
mother. He greatly disturbed that poor woman at intervals, by
darting out of his sleeping closet, where he made his toilet, with a
suppressed cry of "You are going to flop, mother.- Halloa, father!"
and, after raising this fictitious alarm, darting in again with an
undutiful grin.

  Mr. Cruncher's temper was not at all improved when he came to his
breakfast. He resented Mrs. Cruncher's saying grace with particular
animosity.

  "Now, Aggerawayter! What are you up to? At it again?"

  His wife explained that she had merely "asked a blessing."

  "Don't do it!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking about, as if he rather
expected to see the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wife's
petitions. "I ain't a going to be blest out of house and home. I won't
have my vittles blest off my table. Keep still!"

  Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a
party which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher
worried his breakfast rather than ate it, growling over it like any
four-footed inmate of a menagerie. Towards nine o'clock he smoothed
his ruffled aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-like
an exterior as he could overlay his natural self with, issued forth to
the occupation of the day.

  It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite
description of himself as "a honest tradesman." His stock consisted of
a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, which
stool, young Jerry, walking at his father's side, carried every
morning to beneath the banking-house window that was nearest Temple
Bar: where, with the addition of the first handful of straw that could
be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wet from
the odd-job-man's feet, it formed the encampment for the day. On
this post of his, Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street and
the Temple, as the Bar itself,-and was almost as ill-looking.

  Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his
three-cornered hat to the oldest of men as they passed in to
Tellson's, Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with
young Jerry standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through
the Bar, to inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description
on passing boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose.
Father and son, extremely like each other, looking silently on at
the morning traffic in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to
one another as the two eyes of each were, bore a considerable
resemblance to a pair of monkeys. The resemblance was not lessened
by the accidental circumstance, that the mature Jerry bit and spat out
straw, while the twinkling eyes of the youthful Jerry were as
restlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street.

  The head of one of the regular indoor messengers attached to
Tellson's establishment was put through the door, and the word was
given:

  "Porter wanted!"

  "Hooray, father! Here's an early job to begin with!"

  Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself
on the stool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw his
father had been chewing, and cogitated.

  "Al-ways rusty! His fingers is al-ways rusty!" muttered young Jerry.
"Where does my father get all that iron rust from? He don't get no
iron rust here!"

  II

  A SIGHT

  "YOU KNOW the Old Bailey, well, no doubt?" said one of the oldest of
clerks to Jerry the messenger.

  "Ye-es, sir." returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner. "I do
know the Bailey."

  "Just so. And you know Mr. Lorry."

  "I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey. Much
better," said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at the
establishment in question, "than I, as a honest tradesman, wish to
know the Bailey."

  "Very well. Find the door where the witnesses go in, and show the
door-keeper this note for Mr. Lorry. He will then let you in."

  "Into the court, sir?"

  "Into the court."

  Mr. Cruncher's eyes seemed to get a little closer to one another,
and to interchange the inquiry, "What do you think of this?"

  "Am I to wait in the court, sir?" he asked, as the result of that
conference.

  "I am going to tell you. The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr.
Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry's
attention, and show him where you stand. Then what you have to do, is,
to remain there until he wants you."

  "Is that all, sir?"

  "That's all. He wishes to have a messenger at hand. This is to
tell him you are there."

  As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the
note, Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to
the blotting-paper stage, remarked:

  "I suppose they'll be trying Forgeries this morning?"

  "Treason!"

  "That's quartering," said Jerry. "Barbarous!"

  "It is the law," remarked the ancient clerk, turning his surprised
spectacles upon him. "It is the law."

  "It's hard in the law to spile a man, I think. It's hard enough to
kill him, but it's very hard to spile him, sir."

  "Not at all," returned the ancient clerk. "Speak well of the law.
Take care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the law
to take care of itself. I give you that advice."

  "It's the damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice," said
Jerry. "I leave you to judge what a damp way of earning a living
mine is."

  "Well, well," said the old clerk; "we an have our various ways of
gaining a livelihood. Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have
dry ways. Here is the letter. Go along."

  Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less
internal deference than he made an outward show of, "You are a lean
old one, too," made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his
destination, and went his way.

  They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside
Newgate had not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since
attached to it. But, the gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds of
debauchery and villainy were practised, and where dire diseases were
bred, that came into court with the prisoners, and sometimes rushed
straight from the dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulled
him off the bench. It had more than once happened, that the Judge in
the black cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as the
prisoner's, and even died before him. For the rest, the Old Bailey was
famous as a kind of deadly inn-yard, from which pale travellers set
out continually, in carts and coaches, on a violent passage into the
other world: traversing some two miles and a half of public street and
road, and shaming few good citizens, if any. So powerful is use, and
so desirable to be good use in the beginning. It was famous, too,
for the pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted a punishment
of which no one could foresee the extent; also, for the whipping-post,
another dear old institution, very humanising and softening to
behold in action; also, for extensive transactions in blood-money,
another fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematically leading to the
most frightful mercenary crimes that could be committed under
Heaven. Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date, was a choice
illustration of the precept, that "Whatever is is right;" an
aphorism that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not include
the troublesome consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.

  Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this
hideous scene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to make
his way quietly, the messenger found out the door he sought, and
handed in his letter through a trap in it. For, people then paid to
see the play at the Old Bailey, just as they paid to see the play in
Bedlam-only the former entertainment was much the dearer. Therefore,
all the Old Bailey doors were well guarded- except, indeed, the social
doors by which the criminals got there, and those were always left
wide open.

  After some delay and demur, the door grudgingly turned on its hinges
a very little way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himself
into court.

  "What's on?" he asked, in a whisper, of the man he found himself
next to.

  "Nothing yet."

  "What's coming on?"

  "The Treason case."

  "The quartering one, eh?"

  "Ah!" returned the man, with a relish; "he'll be drawn on a hurdle
to be half hanged, and then he'll be taken down and sliced before
his own face, and then his inside will be taken out and burnt while he
looks on, and then his head will be chopped off, and he'll be cut into
quarters. That's the sentence."

  "If he's found Guilty, you mean to say?" Jerry added, by way of
proviso.

  "Oh! they'll find him guilty," said the other. "Don't you be
afraid of that."

  Mr. Cruncher's attention was here diverted to the door-keeper,
whom he saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand.
Mr. Lorry sat at a table, among the gentlemen in wigs: not far from
a wigged gentleman, the prisoner's counsel, who had a great bundle
of papers before him: and nearly opposite another wigged gentleman
with his hands in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr.
Cruncher looked at him then or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated
on the ceiling of the court. After some gruff coughing and rubbing
of his chin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice of
Mr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly nodded
and sat down again.

  "What's he got to do with the case?" asked the man he had spoken
with.

  "Blest if I know," said Jerry.

  "What have you got to do with it, then, if a person may inquire?"

  "Blest if I know that either," said Jerry.

  The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and
settling down in the court, stopped the dialogue. Presently, the
dock became the central point of interest. Two gaolers, who had been
standing there, went out, and the prisoner was brought in, and put
to the bar.

  Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at the
ceiling, stared at him. All the human breath in the place, rolled at
him, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire. Eager faces strained round
pillars and comers, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rows
stood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on the floor of the court,
laid their hands on the shoulders of the people before them, to help
themselves, at anybody's cost, to a view of him- stood a-tiptoe, got
upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see every inch of him.
Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit of the spiked
wall of Newgate, Jerry stood: aiming at the prisoner the beery
breath of a whet he had taken as he came along, and discharging it
to mingle with the waves of other beer, and gin, and tea, and
coffee, and what not, that flowed at him, and already broke upon the
great windows behind him in an impure mist and rain.

  The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of about
five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek
and a dark eye. His condition was that of a young gentleman. He was
plainly dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was
long and dark, was gathered in a ribbon at the back of his neck;
more to be out of his way than for ornament. As an emotion of the mind
will express itself through any covering of the body, so the
paleness which his situation engendered came through the brown upon
his cheek, showing the soul to be stronger than the sun. He was
otherwise quite self-possessed, bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet.

  The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at,
was not a sort that elevated humanity. Had he stood in peril of a less
horrible sentence- had there been a chance of any one of its savage
details being spared- by just so much would he have lost in his
fascination. The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefully
mangled, was the sight; the immortal creature that was to be so
butchered and torn asunder, yielded the sensation. Whatever gloss
the various spectators put upon the interest, according to their
several arts and powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at the
root of it, Ogreish.

  Silence in the court! Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not
Guilty to an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and
jangle) for that he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious,
excellent, and so forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his
having, on divers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted
Lewis, the French King, in his wars against our said serene,
illustrious, excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and
going, between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious,
excellent, and so forth, and those of the said French Lewis, and
wickedly, falsely, traitorously, and otherwise evil-adverbiously,
revealing to the said French Lewis what forces our said serene,
illustrious, excellent, and so forth, had in preparation to send to
Canada and North America. This much, Jerry, with his head becoming
more and more spiky as the law terms bristled it, made out with huge
satisfaction, and so arrived circuitously at the understanding that
the aforesaid, and over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay,
stood there before him upon his trial; that the jury were swearing in;
and that Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.

  The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged,
beheaded, and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched from the
situation, nor assumed any theatrical air in it. He was quiet and
attentive; watched the opening proceedings with a grave interest;
and stood with his hands resting on the slab of wood before him, so
composedly, that they had not displaced a leaf of the herbs with which
it was strewn. The court was all bestrewn with herbs and sprinkled
with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol fever.

  Over the prisoner's head there was a mirror, to throw the light down
upon him. Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflected
in it, and had passed from its surface and this earth's together.
Haunted in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would have
been, if the glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, as
the ocean is one day to give up its dead. Some passing thought of
the infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may have
struck the prisoner's mind. Be that as it may, a change in his
position making him conscious of a bar of light across his face, he
looked up; and when he saw the glass his face flushed, and his right
hand pushed the herbs away.

  It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the
court which was on his left. About on a level with his eyes, there
sat, in that corner of the Judge's bench, two persons upon whom his
look immediately rested; so immediately, and so much to the changing
of his aspect, that all the eyes that were turned upon him, turned
to them.

  The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little more
than twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man of
a very remarkable appearance in respect of the absolute whiteness of
his hair, and a certain indescribable intensity of face: not of an
active kind, but pondering and self-communing. When this expression
was upon him, he looked as if he were old; but when it was stirred and
broken up- as it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to his
daughter- he became a handsome man, not past the prime of life.

  His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she
sat by him, and the other pressed upon it. She had drawn close to him,
in her dread of the scene, and in her pity for the prisoner. Her
forehead had been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror and
compassion that saw nothing but the peril of the accused. This had
been so very noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown,
that starers who had had no pity for him were touched by her; and
the whisper went about, "Who are they?"

  Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his
own manner, and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in his
absorption, stretched his neck to hear who they were. The crowd
about him had pressed and passed the inquiry on to the nearest
attendant, and from him it had been more slowly pressed and passed
back; at last it got to Jerry:

  "Witnesses."

  "For which side?"

  "Against."

  "Against what side?"

  "The prisoner's."

  The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalled
them, leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whose
life was in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope,
grind the axe, and hammer the nails into the scaffold.

  III

  A DISAPPOINTMENT

  MR. ATTORNEY-GENERAL had to inform the jury, that the prisoner
before them, though young in years, was old in the treasonable
practices which claimed the forfeit of his life. That this
correspondence with the public enemy was not a correspondence of
to-day, or of yesterday, or even of last year, or of the year
before. That, it was certain the prisoner had, for longer than that,
been in the habit of passing and repassing between France and England,
on secret business of which he could give no honest account. That,
if it were in the nature of traitorous ways to thrive (which happily
it never was), the real wickedness and guilt of his business might
have remained undiscovered. That Providence, however, had put it
into the heart of a person who was beyond fear and beyond reproach, to
ferret out the nature of the prisoner's schemes, and, struck with
horror, to disclose them to his Majesty's Chief Secretary of State and
most honourable Privy Council. That, this patriot would be produced
before them. That, his position and attitude were, on the whole,
sublime. That, he had been the prisoner's friend, but, at once in an
auspicious and an evil hour detecting his infamy, had resolved to
immolate the traitor he could no longer cherish in his bosom, on the
sacred altar of his country. That, if statues were decreed in Britain,
as in ancient Greece and Rome, to public benefactors, this shining
citizen would assuredly have had one. That, as they were not so
decreed, he probably would not have one. That, Virtue, as had been
observed by the poets (in many passages which he well knew the jury
would have, word for word, at the tips of their tongues; whereat the
jury's countenances displayed a guilty consciousness that they knew
nothing about the passages), was in a manner contagious; more
especially the bright virtue known as patriotism, or love of
country. That, the lofty example of this immaculate and
unimpeachable witness for the Crown, to refer to whom however
unworthily was an honour, had communicated itself to the prisoner's
servant, and had engendered in him a holy determination to examine his
master's table-drawers and pockets, and secrete his papers. That, he
(Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared to hear some disparagement
attempted of this admirable servant; but that, in a general way, he
preferred him to his (Mr. Attorney-General's) brothers and sisters,
and honoured him more than his (Mr. Attorney-General's) father and
mother. That, he called with confidence on the jury to come and do
likewise. That, the evidence of these two witnesses, coupled with
the documents of their discovering that would be produced, would
show the prisoner to have been furnished with lists of his Majesty's
forces, and of their disposition and preparation, both by sea and
land, and would leave no doubt that he had habitually conveyed such
information to a hostile power. That, these lists could not be
proved to be in the prisoner's handwriting; but that it was all the
same; that, indeed, it was rather the better for the prosecution, as
showing the prisoner to be artful in his precautions. That, the
proof would go back five years, and would show the prisoner already
engaged in these pernicious missions, within a few weeks before the
date of the very first action fought between the British troops and
the Americans. That, for these reasons, the jury, being a loyal jury
(as he knew they were), and being a responsible jury (as they knew
they were), must positively find the prisoner Guilty, and make an
end of him, whether they liked it or not. That, they never could lay
their heads upon their pillows; that, they never could tolerate the
idea of their wives laying their heads upon their pillows; that,
they never could endure the notion of their children laying their
heads upon their pillows; in short, that there never more could be,
for them or theirs, any laying of heads upon pillows at all, unless
the prisoner's head was taken off. That head Mr. Attorney-General
concluded by demanding of them, in the name of everything he could
think of with a round turn in it, and on the faith of his solemn
asseveration that he already considered the prisoner as good as dead
and gone.

  When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as if
a cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, in
anticipation of what he was soon to become. When toned down again, the
unimpeachable patriot appeared in the witness-box.

  Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leader's lead, examined
the patriot: John Barsad, gentleman, by name. The story of his pure
soul was exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be-
perhaps, if it had a fault, a little too exactly. Having released
his noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawn
himself, but that the wigged gentleman with the papers before him,
sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions. The
wigged gentleman sitting opposite, still looking at the ceiling of the
court.

  Had he ever been a spy himself? No, he scorned the base insinuation.
What did he live upon? His property. Where was his property? He didn't
precisely remember where it was. What was it? No business of
anybody's. Had he inherited it? Yes, he had. From whom? Distant
relation. Very distant? Rather. Ever been in prison? Certainly not.
Never in a debtors' prison? Didn't see what that had to do with it.
Never in a debtors' prison?- Come, once again. Never? Yes. How many
times? Two or three times. Not five or six? Perhaps. Of what
profession? Gentleman. Ever been kicked? Might have been.
Frequently? No. Ever kicked downstairs? Decidedly not; once received a
kick on the top of a staircase, and fell down-stairs of his own
accord. Kicked on that occasion for cheating at dice? Something to
that effect was said by the intoxicated liar who committed the
assault, but it was not true. Swear it was not true? Positively.
Ever live by cheating at play? Never. Ever live by play? Not more than
other gentlemen do. Ever borrow money of the prisoner? Yes. Ever pay
him? No. Was not this intimacy with the prisoner, in reality a very
slight one, forced upon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?
No. Sure he saw the prisoner with these lists? Certain. Knew no more
about the lists? No. Had not procured them himself, for instance?
No. Expect to get anything by this evidence? No. Not in regular
government pay and employment, to lay traps? Oh dear no. Or to do
anything? Oh dear no. Swear that? Over and over again. No motives
but motives of sheer patriotism? None whatever.

  The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at a
great rate. He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith
and simplicity, four years ago. He had asked the prisoner, aboard
the Calais packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner had
engaged him. He had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellow as
an act of charity- never thought of such a thing. He began to have
suspicions of the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon
afterwards. In arranging his clothes, while travelling, he had seen
similar lists to these in the prisoner's pockets, over and over again.
He had taken these lists from the drawer of the prisoner's desk. He
had not put them there first. He had seen the prisoner show these
identical lists to French gentlemen at Calais, and similar lists to
French gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne. He loved his country,
and couldn't bear it, and had given information. He had never been
suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been maligned
respecting a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one.
He had known the last witness seven or eight years; that was merely
a coincidence. He didn't call it a particularly curious coincidence;
most coincidences were curious. Neither did he call it a curious
coincidence that true patriotism was his only motive too. He was a
true Briton, and hoped there were many like him.

  The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr.
Jarvis Lorry.

  "Mr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellson's bank?"

  "I am."

  "On a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London
and Dover by the mail?"

  "It did."

  "Were there any other passengers in the mail?"

  "Two."

  "Did they alight on the road in the course of the night?"

  "They did."

  "Mr. Lorry, look upon the prisoner. Was he one of those two
passengers?"

  "I cannot undertake to say that he was."

  "Does he resemble either of these two passengers?"

  "Both were so wrapped up, and the night was so dark, and we were all
so reserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that."

  "Mr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner. Supposing him wrapped up
as those two passengers were, is there anything in his bulk and
stature to render it unlikely that he was one of them?"

  "No."

  "You will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of them?"

  "No."

  "So at least you say he may have been one of them?"

  "Yes. Except that I remember them both to have been- like myself
-timorous of highwaymen, and the prisoner has not a timorous air."

  "Did you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?"

  "I certainly have seen that."

  "Mr. Lorry, look once more upon the prisoner. Have you seen him,
to your certain knowledge, before?"

  "I have."

  "When?"

  "I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at
Calais, the prisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I
returned, and made the voyage with me."

  "At what hour did he come on board?"

  "At a little after midnight."

  "In the dead of the night. Was he the only passenger who came on
board at that untimely hour?"

  "He happened to be the only one."

  "Never mind about 'happening,' Mr. Lorry. He was the only
passenger who came on board in the dead of the night?"

  "He was."

  "Were you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?"

  "With two companions. A gentleman and lady. They are here."

  "They are here. Had you any conversation with the prisoner?"

  "Hardly any. The weather was stormy, and the passage long and rough,
and I lay on a sofa, almost from shore to shore."

  "Miss Manette!"

  The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were
now turned again, stood up where she had sat. Her father rose with
her, and kept her hand drawn through his arm.

  "Miss Manette, look upon the prisoner."

  To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and
beauty, was far more trying to the accused than to be confronted
with all the crowd. Standing, as it were, apart with her on the edge
of his grave, not all the staring curiosity that looked on, could, for
the moment, nerve him to remain quite still. His hurried right hand
parcelled out the herbs before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a
garden; and his efforts to control and steady his breathing shook
the lips from which the colour rushed to his heart. The buzz of the
great flies was loud again.

  "Miss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?"

  "Yes, sir."

  "Where?"

  "On board of the packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on the
same occasion."

  "You are the young lady just now referred to?"

  "O! most unhappily, I am!"

  The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musical
voice of the Judge, as he said something fiercely: "Answer the
questions put to you, and make no remark upon them."

  "Miss Manette, had you any conversation with the prisoner on that
passage across the Channel?"

  "Yes, sir."

  "Recall it."

  In the midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began:

  "When the gentleman came on board--"

  "Do you mean the prisoner?" inquired the Judge, knitting his brows.

  "Yes, my Lord."

  "Then say the prisoner."

  "When the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father,"
turning her eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, "was much
fatigued and in a very weak state of health. My father was so
reduced that I was afraid to take him out of the air, and I had made a
bed for him on the deck near the cabin steps, and I sat on the deck at
his side to take care of him. There were no other passengers that
night, but we four. The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to
advise me how I could shelter my father from the wind and weather,
better than I had done. I had not known how to do it well, not
understanding how the wind would set when we were out of the
harbour. He did it for me. He expressed great gentleness and
kindness for my father's state, and I am sure he felt it. That was the
manner of our beginning to speak together."

  "Let me interrupt you for a moment. Had he come on board alone?"

  "No."

  "How many were with him?"

  "Two French gentlemen."

  "Had they conferred together?"

  "They had conferred together until the last moment, when it was
necessary for the French gentlemen to be landed in their boat."

  "Had any papers been handed about among them, similar to these
lists?"

  "Some papers had been handed about among them, but I don't know what
papers."

  "Like these in shape and size?"

  "Possibly, but indeed I don't know, although they stood whispering
very near to me: because they stood at the top of the cabin steps to
have the light of the lamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp,
and they spoke very low, and I did not hear what they said, and saw
only that they looked at papers."

  "Now, to the prisoner's conversation, Miss Manette."

  "The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me- which arose out
of my helpless situation- as he was kind, and good, and useful to my
father. I hope," bursting into tears, "I may not repay him by doing
him harm to-day."

  Buzzing from the blue-flies.

  "Miss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that
you give the evidence which it is your duty to give- which you must
give- and which you cannot escape from giving- with great
unwillingness, he is the only person present in that condition. Please
to go on."

  "He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and
difficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that he was
therefore travelling under an assumed name. He said that this business
had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might, at
intervals, take him backwards and forwards between France and
England for a long time to come."

  "Did he say anything about America, Miss Manette? Be particular."

  "He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he
said that, so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on
England's part. He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George
Washington might gain almost as great a name in history as George
the Third. But there was no harm in his way of saying this: it was
said laughingly, and to beguile the time."

  Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief
actor in a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed,
will be unconsciously imitated by the spectators. Her forehead was
painfully anxious and instent as she gave this evidence, and, in the
pauses when she stopped for the Judge to write it down, watched its
effect upon the counsel for and against. Among the lookers-on there
was the same expression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that a
great majority of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors
reflecting the witness, when the Judge looked up from his notes to
glare at that tremendous heresy about George Washington.

  Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it
necessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call the young
lady's father, Doctor Manette. Who was called accordingly.

  "Doctor Manette, look upon the prisoner. Have you ever seen him
before?"

  "Once. When he called at my lodgings in London. Some three years, or
three years and a half ago."

  "Can you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board the
packet, or speak to his conversation with your daughter?"

  "Sir, I can do neither."

  "Is there any particular and special reason for your being unable to
do either?"

  He answered, in a low voice, "There is."

  "Has it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, without
trial, or even accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?"

  He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, "A long
imprisonment."

  "Were you newly released on the occasion in question?"

  "They tell me so."

  "Have you no remembrance of the occasion?"

  "None. My mind is a blank, from some time- I cannot even say what
time- when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes, to the
time when I found myself living in London with my dear daughter
here. She had become familiar to me, when a gracious God restored my
faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how she had become
familiar. I have no remembrance of the process."

  Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and the father and daughter sat
down together.

  A singular circumstance then arose in the case. The object in hand
being to show that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter
untracked, in the Dover mail on that Friday night in November five
years ago, and got out of the mail in the night, as a blind, at a
place where he did not remain, but from which he travelled back some
dozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard, and there collected
information; a witness was called to identify him as having been at
the precise time required, in the coffee-room of an hotel in that
garrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for another person. The prisoner's
counsel was cross-examining this witness with no result, except that
he had never seen the prisoner on any other occasion, when the
wigged gentleman who had all this time been looking at the ceiling
of the court, wrote a word or two on a little piece of paper,
screwed it up, and tossed it to him. Opening this piece of paper in
the next pause, the counsel looked with great attention and
curiosity at the prisoner.

  "You say again you are quite sure that it was the prisoner?"

  The witness was quite sure.

  "Did you ever see anybody very like the prisoner?"

  Not so like (the witness said) as that he could be mistaken.

  "Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there," pointing
to him who had tossed the paper over, "and then look well upon the
prisoner. How say you? Are they very like each other?"

  Allowing for my learned friend's appearance being careless and
slovenly if not debauched, they were sufficiently like each other to
surprise, not only the witness, but everybody present, when they
were thus brought into comparison. My Lord being prayed to bid my
learned friend lay aside his wig, and giving no very gracious consent,
the likeness became much more remarkable. My Lord inquired of Mr.
Stryver (the prisoner's counsel), whether they were next to try Mr.
Carton (name of my learned friend) for treason? But, Mr. Stryver
replied to my Lord, no; but he would ask the witness to tell him
whether what happened once, might happen twice; whether he would
have been so confident if he had seen this illustration of his
rashness sooner, whether he would be so confident, having seen it; and
more. The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like a
crockery vessel, and shiver his part of the case to useless lumber.

  Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his
fingers in his following of the evidence. He had now to attend while
Mr. Stryver fitted the prisoner's case on the jury, like a compact
suit of clothes; showing them how the patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy
and traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of the
greatest scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas- which he
certainly did look rather like. How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his
friend and partner, and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of
those forgers and false swearers had rested on the prisoner as a
victim, because some family affairs in France, he being of French
extraction, did require his making those passages across the
Channel- though what those affairs were, a consideration for others
who were near and dear to him, forbade him, even for his life, to
disclose. How the evidence that had been warped and wrested from the
young lady, whose anguish in giving it they had witnessed, came to
nothing, involving the mere little innocent gallantries and
politenesses likely to pass between any young gentleman and young lady
so thrown together;- with the exception of that reference to George
Washington, which was altogether too extravagant and impossible to
be regarded in any other fight than as a monstrous joke. How it
would be a weakness in the government to break down in this attempt to
practise for popularity on the lowest national antipathies and
fears, and therefore Mr. Attorney-General had made the most of it;
how, nevertheless, it rested upon nothing, save that vile and infamous
character of evidence too often disfiguring such cases, and of which
the State Trials of this country were full. But, there my Lord
interposed (with as grave a face as if it had not been true), saying
that he could not sit upon that Bench and suffer those allusions.

  Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next
to attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of
clothes Mr. Stryver had fitted on the jury, inside out; showing how
Barsad and Cly were even a hundred times better than he had thought
them, and the prisoner a hundred times worse. Lastly, came my Lord
himself, turning the suit of clothes, now inside out, now outside
in, but on the whole decidedly trimming and shaping them into
grave-clothes for the prisoner.

  And now, the jury turned to consider, and the great flies swarmed
again.

  Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court,
changed neither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement.
While his learned friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before
him, whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time
glanced anxiously at the jury; while all the spectators moved more
or less, and grouped themselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose
from his seat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, not
unattended by a suspicion in the minds of the audience that his
state was feverish; this one man sat leaning back, with his torn
gown half off him, his untidy wig put on just as it had happened to
light on his head after its removal, his hands in his pockets, and his
eyes on the ceiling as they had been all day. Something especially
reckless in his demeanour, not only gave him a disreputable look,
but so diminished the strong resemblance he undoubtedly bore to the
prisoner (which his momentary earnestness, when they were compared
together, had strengthened), that many of the lookers-on, taking
note of him now, said to one another they would hardly have thought
the two were so alike. Mr. Cruncher made the observation to his next
neighbour, and added, "I'd hold half a guinea that he don't get no
law-work to do. Don't look like the sort of one to get any, do he?"

  Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than
he appeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette's head dropped upon
her father's breast, he was the first to see it, and to say audibly:
"Officer! look to that young lady. Help the gentleman to take her out.
Don't you see she will fall!"

  There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much
sympathy with her father. It had evidently been a great distress to
him, to have the days of his imprisonment recalled. He had shown
strong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that pondering
or brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavy
cloud, ever since. As he passed out, the jury, who had turned back and
paused a moment, spoke, through their foreman.

  They were not agreed, and wished to retire. My Lord (perhaps with
George Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were not
agreed, but signified his pleasure that they should retire under watch
and ward, and retired himself. The trial had lasted all day, and the
lamps in the court were now being lighted. It began to be rumoured
that the jury would be out a long while. The spectators dropped off to
get refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the back of the dock,
and sat down.

  Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father
went out, now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry: who, in the slackened
interest, could easily get near him.

  "Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can. But, keep
in the way. You will be sure to hear when the jury come in. Don't be a
moment behind them, for I want you to take the verdict back to the
bank. You are the quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple
Bar long before I can."

  Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it in
acknowledgment of this communication and a shilling. Mr. Carton came
up at the moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm.

  "How is the young lady?"

  "She is greatly distressed; but her father is comforting her, and
she feels the better for being out of court."

  "I'll tell the prisoner so. It won't do for a respectable bank
gentleman like you, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know."

  Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the
point in his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the
bar. The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed
him, all eyes, ears, and spikes.

  "Mr. Darnay!"

  The prisoner came forward directly.

  "You will naturally be anxious to hear of the witness, Miss Manette.
She will do very well. You have seen the worst of her agitation."

  "I am deeply sorry to have been the cause of it. Could you tell
her so for me, with my fervent acknowledgments?"

  "Yes, I could. I will, if you ask it."

  Mr. Carton's manner was so careless as to be almost insolent. He
stood, half turned from the prisoner, lounging with his elbow
against the bar.

  "I do ask it. Accept my cordial thanks."

  "What," said Carton, still only half turned towards him, "do you
expect, Mr. Darnay?"

  "The worst."

  "It's the wisest thing to expect, and the likeliest. But I think
their withdrawing is in your favour."

  Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard
no more: but left them- so like each other in feature, so unlike
each other in manner- standing side by side, both reflected in the
glass above them.

  An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal
crowded passages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies
and ale. The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after
taking that refection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and
a rapid tide of people setting up the stairs that led to the court,
carried him along with them.

  "Jerry! Jerry!" Mr. Lorry was already calling at the door when he
got there.

  "Here, sir! It's a fight to get back again. Here I am, sir!"

  Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through the throng. "Quick! Have you
got it?"

  "Yes, sir."

  Hastily written on the paper was the word "AQUITTED."

  "If you had sent the message, 'Recalled to Life,' again," muttered
Jerry, as he turned, "I should have known what you meant, this time."

  He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything
else, until he was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd came
pouring out with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and
a loud buzz swept into the street as if the baffled blue-flies were
dispersing in search of other carrion.

  IV

  CONGRATULATORY

  FROM the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of
the human stew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off,
when Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, the
solicitor for the defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood
gathered round Mr. Charles Darnay- just released- congratulating him
on his escape from death.

  It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise
in Doctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, the
shoemaker of the garret in Paris. Yet, no one could have looked at him
twice, without looking again: even though the opportunity of
observation had not extended to the mournful cadence of his low
grave voice, and to the abstraction that overclouded him fitfully,
without any apparent reason. While one external cause, and that a
reference to his long lingering agony, would always- as on the
trial- evoke this condition from the depths of his soul, it was also
in its nature to arise of itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as
incomprehensible to those unacquainted with his story as if they had
seen the shadow of the actual Bastille thrown upon him by a summer
sun, when the substance was three hundred miles away.

  Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding from
his mind. She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyond
his misery, and to a Present beyond his misery: and the sound of her
voice, the light of her face, the touch of her hand, had a strong
beneficial influence with him almost always. Not absolutely always,
for she could recall some occasions on which her power had failed; but
they were few and slight, and she believed them over.

  Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had
turned to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked. Mr. Stryver, a man of
little more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was,
stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy, had a
pushing way of shouldering himself (morally and physically) into
companies and conversations, that argued well for his shouldering
his way up in life.

  He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at
his late client to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorry
clean out of the group: "I am glad to have brought you off with
honour, Mr. Darnay. It was an infamous prosecution, grossly
infamous; but not the less likely to succeed on that account."

  "You have laid me under an obligation to you for life- in two
senses," said his late client, taking his hand.

  "I have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good
as another man's, I believe."

  It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, "Much better," Mr.
Lorry said it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the
interested object of squeezing himself back again.

  "You think so?" said Mr. Stryver. "Well! you have been present all
day, and you ought to know. You are a man of business, too."

  "And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the
law had now shouldered back into the group, just as he had
previously shouldered him out of it- "as such I will appeal to
Doctor Manette, to break up this conference and order us all to our
homes. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are
worn out."

  "Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's
work to do yet. Speak for yourself."

  "I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and
for Miss Lucie, and- Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us
all?" He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her
father.

  His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at
Darnay; an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and
distrust, not even unmixed with fear. With this strange expression
on him his thoughts had wandered away.

  "My father," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.

  He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her.

  "Shall we go home, my father?"

  With a long breath, he answered "Yes."

  The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under the
impression- which he himself had originated- that he would not be
released that night. The lights were nearly all extinguished in the
passages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,
and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interest
of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople
it. Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed
into the open air. A hackney-coach was called, and the father and
daughter departed in it.

  Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way
back to the robing-room. Another person, who had not joined the group,
or interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been
leaning against the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently
strolled out after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove
away. He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon
the pavement.

  "So, Mr. Lorry! Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"

  Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in the day's
proceedings; nobody had known of it. He was unrobed, and was none
the better for it in appearance.

  "If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when
the business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business
appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."

  Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that
before, sir. We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own
masters. We have to think of the House more than ourselves."

  "I know, I know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly. "Don't be
nettled, Mr. Lorry. You are as good as another, I have no doubt:
better, I dare say."

  "And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I really
don't know what you have to do with the matter. If you'll excuse me,
as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it is
your business."

  "Business! Bless you, I have no business," said Mr. Carton.

  "It is a pity you have not, sir."

  "I think so, too."

  "If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it."

  "Lord love you, no!- I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton.

  "Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,
"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing. And,
sir, if business imposes its restraints and its silences and
impediments, Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how
to make allowance for that circumstance. Mr. Darnay, good night, God
bless you, sir! I hope you have been this day preserved for a
prosperous and happy life.- Chair there!"

  Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well the barrister, Mr.
Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson's.
Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite
sober, laughed then, and turned to Darnay:

  "This is a strange chance that throws you and me together. This must
be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart
on these street stones?"

  "I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this
world again."

  "I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty far
advanced on your way to another. You speak faintly."

  "I begin to think I am faint."

  "Then why the devil don't you dine? I dined, myself, while those
numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to- this, or
some other. Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at."

  Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to
Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern. Here, they were
shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting his
strength with a good plain dinner and good wine: while Carton sat
opposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of port
before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him.

  "Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again,
Mr. Darnay?"

  "I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far
mended as to feel that."

  "It must be an immense satisfaction!"

  He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again: which was a
large one.

  "As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to
it. It bas no good in it for me- except wine like this- nor I for
it. So we are not much alike in that particular. Indeed, I begin to
think we are not much alike in any particular, you and I."

  Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with
this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay
was at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.

  "Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you
call a health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?"

  "What health? What toast?"

  "Why, it's on the tip of your tongue. It ought to be, it must be,
I'll swear it's there."

  "Miss Manette, then!"

  "Miss Manette, then!"

  Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast,
Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it
shivered to pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another.

  "That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr.
Darnay!" he said, filling his new goblet.

  A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were the answer.

  "That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by! How
does it feel? Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be the object
of such sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"

  Again Darnay answered not a word.

  "She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it
her. Not that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."

  The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this
disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in
the strait of the day. He turned the dialogue to that point, and
thanked him for it.

  "I neither want any thanks, nor merit any," was the careless
rejoinder. "It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don't know
why I did it, in the second. Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question."

  "Willingly, and a small return for your good offices."

  "Do you think I particularly like you?"

  "Really, Mr. Carton," returned the other, oddly disconcerted, "I
have not asked myself the question."

  "But ask yourself the question now."

  "You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do."

  "I don't think I do," said Carton. "I begin to have a very good
opinion of your understanding."

  "Nevertheless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, "there is
nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and
our parting without ill-blood on either side."

  Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang. "Do you call the
whole reckoning?" said Carton. On his answering in the affirmative,
"Then bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and
wake me at ten."

  The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good
night. Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something
of a threat of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr.
Darnay: you think I am drunk?"

  "I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton."

  "Think? You know I have been drinking."

  "Since I must say so, I know it."

  "Then you shall likewise know why. I am a disappointed drudge,
sir. I care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me."

  "Much to be regretted. You might have used your talents better."

  "May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not. Don't let your sober face
elate you, however; you don't know what it may come to. Good night!"

  When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to
a glass that hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in
it.

  "Do you particularly like the man?" he muttered, at his own image;
"why should you particularly like a man who resembles you? There is
nothing in you to like; you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change
you have made in yourself! A good reason for taking to a man, that
he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you might have
been! Change places with him, and would you have been looked at by
those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face as
he was? Come on, and have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow."

  He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a
few minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling
over the table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down
upon him.

  V

  THE JACKAL

  THOSE WERE drinking days, and most men drank hard. So very great
is the improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a
moderate statement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man
would swallow in the course of a night, without any detriment to his
reputation as a perfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a
ridiculous exaggeration. The learned profession of the law was
certainly not behind any other learned profession in its
Bacchanalian propensities; neither was Mr. Stryver, already fast
shouldering his way to a large and lucrative practice, behind his
compeers in this particular, any more than in the drier parts of the
legal race.

  A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr.
Stryver had begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the
ladder on which he mounted. Sessions and Old Bailey had now to
summon their favourite, specially, to their longing arms; and
shouldering itself towards the visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the
Court of King's Bench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might
be daily seen, bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower
pushing its way at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring
companions.

  It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib
man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that
faculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which
is among the most striking and necessary of the advocate's
accomplishments. But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to
this. The more business he got, the greater his power seemed to grow
of getting at its pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat
carousing with Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers'
ends in the morning.

  Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's
great ally. What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and
Michaelmas, might have floated a king's ship. Stryver never had a case
in hand, anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his
pockets, staring at the ceiling of the court; they went the same
Circuit, and even there they prolonged their usual orgies late into
the night, and Carton was rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home
stealthily and unsteadily to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat. At
last, it began to get about, among such as were interested in the
matter, that although Sydney Carton would never be a lion, he was an
amazingly good jackal, and that he rendered suit and service to
Stryver in that humble capacity.

  "Ten o'clock, sir," said the man at the tavern, whom he had
charged to wake him- "ten o'clock, sir."

  "What's the matter?"

  "Ten o'clock, sir."

  "What do you mean? Ten o'clock at night?"

  "Yes, sir. Your honour told me to call you."

  "Oh! I remember. Very well, very well."

  After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man
dexterously combated by stirring the fire continuously for five
minutes, he got up, tossed his hat on, and walked out. He turned
into the Temple, and, having revived himself by twice pacing the
pavements of King's Bench-walk and Paper-buildings, turned into the
Stryver chambers.

  The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone
home, and the Stryver principal opened the door. He had his slippers
on, and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater
ease. He had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the
eyes, which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from
the portrait of Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under
various disguises of Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age.

  "You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver.

  "About the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."

  They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with
papers, where there was a blazing fire. A kettle steamed upon the hob,
and in the midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty
of wine upon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.

  "You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney."

  "Two to-night, I think. I have been dining with the day's client; or
seeing him dine- it's all one!"

  "That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon the
identification. How did you come by it? When did it strike you?"

  "I thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I should
have been much the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."

  Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.

  "You and your luck, Sydney! Get to work, get to work."

  Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an
adjoining room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin,
and a towel or two. Steeping the towels in the water, and partially
wringing them out, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to
behold, sat down at the table, and said, "Now I am ready!"

  "Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr.
Stryver, gaily, as he looked among his papers.

  "How much?"

  "Only two sets of them."

  "Give me the worst first."

  "There they are, Sydney. Fire away!"

  The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side
of the drinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own
paper-bestrewn table proper, on the other side of it, with the bottles
and glasses ready to his hand. Both resorted to the drinking-table
without stint, but each in a different way; the lion for the most part
reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at the fire, or
occasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, with
knitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes
did not even follow the hand he stretched out for his glass- which
often groped about, for a minute or more, before it found the glass
for his lips. Two or three times, the matter in hand became so knotty,
that the jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his
towels anew. From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin, he
returned with such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can
describe; which were made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.

  At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion,
and proceeded to offer it to him. The lion took it with care and
caution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it, and the
jackal assisted both. When the repast was fully discussed, the lion
put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to mediate. The
jackal then invigorated himself with a bumper for his throttle, and
a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to the collection
of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in the same
manner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three in the
morning.

  "And now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch," said Mr.
Stryver.

  The jackal removed the towels from his head, which had been steaming
again, shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied.

  "You were very sound, Sydney, in the matter of those crown witnesses
to-day. Every question told."

  "I always am sound; am I not?"

  "I don't gainsay it. What has roughened your temper? Put some
punch to it and smooth it again."

  With a deprecatory grunt, the jackal again complied.

  "The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School," said Stryver,
nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in the present and the
past, "the old seesaw Sydney. Up one minute and down the next; now
in spirits and now in despondency!"

  "Ah!" returned the other, sighing: "yes! The same Sydney, with the
same luck. Even then, I did exercises for other boys, and seldom did
my own."

  "And why not?"

  "God knows. It was my way, I suppose."

  He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out
before him, looking at the fire.

  "Carton," said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying
air, as if the fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustained
endeavour was forged, and the one delicate thing to be done for the
old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into
it, "your way is, and always was, a lame way. You summon no energy and
purpose. Look at me."

  "Oh, botheration!" returned Sydney, with a lighter and more
good-humoured laugh, "don't you be moral!"

  "How have I done what I have done?" said Stryver; "how do I do
what I do?"

  "Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose. But it's not worth
your while to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want
to do, you do. You were always in the front rank, and I was always
behind."

  "I had to get into the front rank; I was not born there, was I?"

  "I was not present at the ceremony; but my opinion is you were,"
said Carton. At this, he laughed again, and they both laughed.

  "Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,"
pursued Carton, "you have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen
into mine. Even when we were fellow-students in the Student-Quarter of
Paris, picking up French, and French law, and other French crumbs that
we didn't get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I was
always- nowhere."

  "And whose fault was that?"

  "Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours. You were
always driving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that
restless degree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and
repose. It's a gloomy thing, however, to talk about one's own past,
with the day breaking. Turn me in some other direction before I go."

  "Well then! Pledge me to the pretty witness," said Stryver,
holding up his glass. "Are you turned in a pleasant direction?"

  Apparently not, for he became gloomy again.

  "Pretty witness," he muttered, looking down into his glass. "I
have had enough of witnesses to-day and to-night; who's your pretty
witness?"

  "The picturesque doctor's daughter, Miss Manette."

  "She pretty?"

  "Is she not?"

  "No."

  "Why, man alive, she was the admiration of the whole Court!"

  "Rot the admiration of the whole Court! Who made the Old Bailey a
judge of beauty? She was a golden-haired doll!"

  "Do you know, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp
eyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face: "do you
know, I rather thought, at the time, that you sympathised with the
golden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to the
golden-haired doll?"

  "Quick to see what happened! If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons
within a yard or two of a man's nose, he can see it without a
perspective-glass. I pledge you, but I deny the beauty. And now I'll
have no more drink; I'll get to bed."

  When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle, to
light him down the stairs, the day was coldly looking in through its
grimy windows. When he got out of the house, the air was cold and sad,
the dull sky overcast, the river dark and dim, the whole scene like
a lifeless desert. And wreaths of dust were spinning round and round
before the morning blast, as if the desert-sand had risen far away,
and the first spray of it in its advance had begun to overwhelm the
city.

  Waste forces within him. and a desert all around, this man stood
still on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment,
lying in the wilderness before him, a mirage honourable ambition,
self-denial, and perseverance. In the fair city of this vision,
there were airy galleries from which the loves and graces looked
upon him, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening, waters of
Hope that sparkled in his sight. A moment, and it was gone. Climbing
to a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his
clothes on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.

  Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the
man of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed
exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible of
the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away.

  VI

  HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE

  THE QUIET LODGINGS of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner
not far from Soho-square. On the afternoon of a certain fine Sunday
when the waves of four months had rolled over the trial for treason,
and carried it, as to the public interest and memory, far out to
sea, Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from
Clerkenwell where he lived, on his way to dine with the Doctor.
After several relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had
become the Doctor's friend, and the quiet street-corner was the
sunny part of his life.

  On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in
the afternoon, for three reasons of habit. Firstly, because, on fine
Sundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and
Lucie; secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed
to be with them as the family friend, talking, reading, looking out of
window, and generally getting through the day; thirdly, because be
happened to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how
the ways of the Doctor's household pointed to that time as a likely
time for solving them.

  A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not to
be found in London. There was no way through it, and the front windows
of the Doctor's lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street
that had a congenial air of retirement on it. There were few buildings
then, north of the Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and
wild flowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, in the now vanished
fields. As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with
vigorous freedom, instead of languishing into the parish like stray
paupers without a settlement; and there was many a good south wall,
not far off, on which the peaches ripened in their season.

  The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlier
part of the day; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was in
shadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyond
it into a glare of brightness. It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful,
a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from the raging
streets.

  There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and
there was. The Doctor occupied two floors of a large still house,
where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereof
little was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of them at
night. In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where a
plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to be made,
and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by some
mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of
the front hall- as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a
similar conversion of all visitors. Very little of these trades, or of
a lonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming
maker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen.
Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed the hall,
or a stranger peered about there, or a distant clink was heard
across the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant. These,
however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that
the sparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in the
corner before it, had their own way from Sunday morning unto
Saturday night.

  Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation,
and its revival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him.
His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting
ingenious experiments, brought him otherwise into moderate request,
and he earned as much as he wanted.

  These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry's knowledge, thoughts, and
notice, when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the
corner, on the fine Sunday afternoon.

  "Doctor Manette at home?"

  Expected home.

  "Miss Lucie at home?"

  Expected home.

  "Miss Pross at home?"

  Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to
anticipate intentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of
the fact.

  "As I am at home myself," said Mr. Lorry, "I'll go upstairs."

  Although the Doctor's daughter had known nothing of the country of
her birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that
ability to make much of little means, which is one of its most
useful and most agreeable characteristics. Simple as the furniture
was, it was set off by so many little adornments, of no value but
for their taste and fancy, that its effect was delightful. The
disposition of everything in the rooms, from the largest object to the
least; the arrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrast
obtained by thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good
sense; were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of
their originator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the very
chairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiar
expression which he knew so well by this time, whether he approved?

  There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which they
communicated being put open that the air might pass freely through
them all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful
resemblance which he detected all around him, walked from one to
another. The first was the best room, and in it were Lucie's birds,
and flowers, and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of
water-colours; the second was the Doctor's consulting-room, used
also as the dining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the
rustle of the plane-tree in the yard, was the Doctor's bedroom, and
there, in a corner, stood the disused shoemaker's bench and tray of
tools, much as it had stood on the fifth floor of the dismal house
by the wine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris.

  "I wonder," said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, "that he
keeps that reminder of his sufferings about him!"

  "And why wonder at that?" was the abrupt inquiry that made him
start.

  It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand,
whose acquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at
Dover, and had since improved.

  "I should have thought-" Mr. Lorry began.

  "Pooh! You'd have thought!" said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off.

  "How do you do?" inquired that lady then- sharply, and yet as if
to express that she bore him no malice.

  "I am pretty well, I thank you," answered Mr. Lorry, with
meekness; "how are you?"

  "Nothing to boast of," said Miss Pross.

  "Indeed?"

  "Ah! indeed!" said Miss Pross. "I am very much put out about my
Ladybird."

  "Indeed?"

  "For gracious sake say something else besides 'indeed,' or you'll
fidget me to death," said Miss Pross: whose character (dissociated
from stature) was shortness.

  "Really, then?" said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment.

  "Really, is bad enough," returned Miss Pross, "but better. Yes, I am
very much put out."

  "May I ask the cause?"

  "I don't want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of
Ladybird, to come here looking after her," said Miss Pross.

  "Do dozens come for that purpose?"

  "Hundreds," said Miss Pross.

  It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before
her time and since) that whenever her original proposition was
questioned, she exaggerated it.

  "Dear me!" said Mr. Lorry, as the safest remark he could think of.

  "I have lived with the darling- or the darling has lived with me,
and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done, you
may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep either
myself or her for nothing- since she was ten years old. And it's
really very hard," said Miss Pross.

  Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his
head; using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak
that would fit anything.

  "All sorts of people who are not in the least degree worthy of the
pet, are always turning up," said Miss Pross. "When you began it--"

  "I began it, Miss Pross?"

  "Didn't you? Who brought her father to life?"

  "Oh! If that was beginning it--" said Mr. Lorry.

  "It wasn't ending it, I suppose? I say, when you began it, it was
hard enough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette,
except that he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no
imputation on him, for it was not to be expected that anybody should
be, under any circumstances. But it really is doubly and trebly hard
to have crowds and multitudes of people turning up after him (I
could have forgiven him), to take Ladybird's affections away from me."

  Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her
by this time to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of
those unselfish creatures- found only among women- who will, for
pure love and admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth
when they have lost it, to beauty that they never had, to
accomplishments that they were never fortunate enough to gain, to
bright hopes that never shone upon their own sombre lives. He knew
enough of the world to know that there is nothing in it better than
the faithful service of the heart; so rendered and so free from any
mercenary taint, he had such an exalted respect for it, that in the
retributive arrangements made by his own mind- we all make such
arrangements, more or less- he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to the
lower Angels than many ladies immeasurably better got up both by
Nature and Art, who had balances at Tellson's.

  "There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird," said
Miss Pross; "and that was my brother Solomon, if he hadn't made a
mistake in life."

  Here again: Mr. Lorry's inquiries into Miss Pross's personal history
had established the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartless
scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a stake
to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for
evermore, with no touch of compunction. Miss Pross's fidelity of
belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake)
was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in his
good opinion of her.

  "As we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people of
business," he said, when they had got back to the drawing-room and had
sat down there in friendly relations, "Let me ask you- does the
Doctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to the shoemaking time,
yet?"

  "Never."

  "And yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?"

  "Ah!" returned Miss Pross, shaking her head. "But I don't say he
don't refer to it within himself."

  "Do you believe that he thinks of it much?"

  "I do," said Miss Pross.

  "Do you imagine--" Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him
up short with:

  "Never imagine anything. Have no imagination at all."

  "I stand corrected; do you suppose- you go so far as to suppose,
sometimes?"

  "Now and then," said Miss Pross.

  "Do you suppose," Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in
his bright eye, as it looked kindly at her, "that Doctor Manette has
any theory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative
to the cause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to the name of
his oppressor?"

  "I don't suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me."

  "And that is--?"

  "That she thinks he has."

  "Now don't be angry at my asking all these questions; because I am a
mere dull man of business, and you are a woman of business."

  "Dull?" Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.

  Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, "No,
no, no. Surely not. To return to business:- Is it not remarkable
that Doctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are an
well assured he is, should never touch upon that question? I will
not say with me, though he had business relations with me many years
ago, and we are now intimate; I will say with the fair daughter to
whom he is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached
to him? Believe me, Miss Pross, I don't approach the topic with you,
out of curiosity, but out of zealous interest."

  "Well! To the best of my understanding, and bad's the best, you'll
tell me," said Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology, "he is
afraid of the whole subject."

  "Afraid?"

  "It's plain enough, I should think, why he may be. It's a dreadful
remembrance. Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it. Not
knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may never
feel certain of not losing himself again. That alone wouldn't make the
subject pleasant, I should think."

  It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for. "True,"
said he, "and fearful to reflect upon. Yet, a doubt lurks in my
mind, Miss Pross, whether it is good for Doctor Manette to have that
suppression always shut up within him. Indeed, it is this doubt and
the uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our present
confidence."

  "Can't be helped," said Miss Pross, shaking her head. "Touch that
string, and he instantly changes for the worse. Better leave it alone.
In short, must leave it alone, like or no like. Sometimes, he gets
up in the dead of the night, and will be heard, by us overhead
there, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room. Ladybird
has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up and down,
walking up and down, in his old prison. She hurries to him, and they
go on together, walking up and down, walking up and down, until he
is composed. But he never says a word of the true reason of his
restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to
him. In silence they go walking up and down together, walking up and
down together, till her love and company have brought him to himself."

  Notwithstanding Miss Pross's denial of her own imagination, there
was a perception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one
sad idea, in her repetition of the phrase, walking up and down,
which testified to her possessing such a thing.

  The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes; it
had begun to echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet, that it
seemed as though the very mention of that weary pacing to and fro
had set it going.

  "Here they are!" said Miss Pross, rising to break up the conference;
"and now we shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!"

  It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a
peculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window,
looking for the father and daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied
they would never approach. Not only would the echoes die away, as
though the steps had gone; but, echoes of other steps that never
came would be heard in their stead, and would die away for good when
they seemed close at hand. However, father and daughter did at last
appear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.

  Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim,
taking off her darling's bonnet when she came up-stairs, and
touching it up with the ends of her handkerchief, and blowing the dust
off it, and folding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing
her rich hair with as much pride as she could possibly have taken in
her own hair if she had been the vainest and handsomest of women.
Her darling was a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking
her, and protesting against her taking so much trouble for her-
which last she only dared to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt,
would have retired to her own chamber and cried. The Doctor was a
pleasant sight too, looking on at them, and telling Miss Pross how she
spoilt Lucie, in accents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in
them as Miss Pross had, and would have had more if it were possible.
Mr. Lorry was a pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his
little wig, and thanking his bachelor stars for having lighted him
in his declining years to a Home. But, no Hundreds of people came to
see the sights, and Mr. Lorry looked in vain for the fulfilment of
Miss Pross's prediction.

  Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people. In the arrangements of
the little household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions, and
always acquitted herself marvellously. Her dinners, of a very modest
quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neat in
their contrivances, half English and half French, that nothing could
be better. Miss Pross's friendship being of the thoroughly practical
kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces, in search of
impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-crowns,
would impart culinary mysteries to her. From these decayed sons and
daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts, that the
woman and girl who formed the staff of domestics regarded her as quite
a Sorceress, or Cinderella's Godmother: who would send out for a fowl,
a rabbit, a vegetable or two from the garden, and change them into
anything she pleased.

  On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctor's table, but on other
days persisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the
lower regions, or in her own room on the second floor- a blue chamber,
to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance. On this
occasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird's pleasant face and
pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so the dinner
was very pleasant, too.

  It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that the
wine should be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sit
there in the air. As everything turned upon her, and revolved about
her, they went out under the plane-tree, and she carried the wine down
for the special benefit of Mr. Lorry. She had installed herself,
some time before, as Mr. Lorry's cup-bearer; and while they sat
under the plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished.
Mysterious backs and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked, and
the plane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads.

  Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves. Mr. Darnay
presented himself while they were sitting under the plane-tree, but he
was only One.

  Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie. But, Miss
Pross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in the head and body,
and retired into the house. She was not unfrequently the victim of
this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation, "a fit
of the jerks."

  The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young.
The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times,
and as they sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he
resting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very agreeable to
trace the likeness.

  He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual
vivacity. "Pray, Doctor Manette," said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under
the plane-tree- and he said it in the natural pursuit of the topic
in hand, which happened to be the old buildings of London- "have you
seen much of the Tower?"

  "Lucie and I have been there; but only casually. We have seen enough
of it, to know that it teems with interest; little more."

  "I have been there, as you remember," said Darnay, with a smile,
though reddening a little angrily, "in another character, and not in a
character that gives facilities for seeing much of it. They told me
a curious thing when I was there."

  "What was that?" Lucie asked.

  "In making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon,
which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten. Every stone of
its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carved by
prisoners- dates, names, complaints, and prayers. Upon a corner
stone in an angle of the wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have gone
to execution, had cut as his last work, three letters. They were
done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteady
hand. At first, they were read as D. I. C.; but, on being more
carefully examined, the last letter was found to be G.  There was no
record or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and many
fruitless guesses were made what the name could have been. At
length, it was suggested that the letters were not initials, but the
complete word, DIG. The floor was examined very carefully under the
inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or some
fragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with
the ashes of a small leathern case or bag. What the unknown prisoner
had written will never be read, but he had written something, and
hidden it away to keep it from the gaoler."

  "My father," exclaimed Lucie, "you are ill!"

  He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head. His manner
and his look quite terrified them all.

  "No, my dear, not ill. There are large drops of rain falling, and
they made me start. We had better go in."

  He recovered himself almost instantly. Rain was really falling in
large drops, and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it.
But, he said not a single word in reference to the discovery that had
been told of, and, as they went into the house, the business eye of
Mr. Lorry either detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as it
turned towards Charles Darnay, the same singular look that had been
upon it when it turned towards him in the passages of the Court House.

  He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had
doubts of his business eye. The arm of the golden giant in the hall
was not more steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to
them that he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever
would be), and that the rain had startled him.

  Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerks
upon her, and yet no Hundreds of people. Mr. Carton had lounged in,
but he made only Two.

  The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors
and windows open, they were overpowered by heat. When the tea-table
was done with, they all moved to one of the windows, and looked out
into the heavy twilight. Lucie sat by her father; Darnay sat beside
her; Carton leaned against a window. The curtains were long and white,
and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled into the corner, caught
them up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectral wings.

  "The rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few," said
Doctor Manette. "It comes slowly."

  "It comes surely," said Carton.

  They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as
people in a dark room, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.

  There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to
get shelter before the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoes
resounded with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a
footstep was there.

  "A multitude of people, and yet a solitude!" said Darnay, when
they had listened for a while.

  "Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?" asked Lucie. "Sometimes, I
have sat here of an evening, until I have fancied- but even the
shade of a foolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so
black and solemn--"

  "Let us shudder too. We may know what it is."

  "It will seem nothing to you. Such whims are only impressive as we
originate them, I think; they are not to be communicated. I have
sometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have made
the echoes out to be the echoes of all the footsteps that are coming
by-and-bye into our lives."

  "There is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be
so," Sydney Carton struck in, in his moody way.

  The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more
and more rapid. The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of
feet; some, as it seemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in
the room; some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping
altogether; all in the distant streets, and not one within sight.

  "Are all these footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss
Manette, or are we to divide them among us?"

  "I don't know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but
you asked for it. When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone,
and then I have imagined them the footsteps of the people who are to
come into my life, and my father's."

  "I take them into mine!" said Carton. "I ask no questions and make
no stipulations. There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss
Manette, and I see them-- by the Lightning." He added the last
words, after there had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging
in the window.

  "And I hear them!" he added again, after a peal of thunder. "Here
they come, fast, fierce, and furious!"

  It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped
him, for no voice could be heard in it. A memorable storm of thunder
and lightning broke with that sweep of water, and there was not a
moment's interval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after the moon
rose at midnight.

  The great bell of Saint Paul's was striking One in the cleared
air, when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a
lantern, set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell. There were
solitary patches of road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell,
and Mr. Lorry, mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this
service: though it was usually performed a good two hours earlier.

  "What a night it has been! Almost a night, Jerry," said Mr. Lorry,
"to bring the dead out of their graves."

  "I never see the night myself, master- nor yet I don't expect to-
what would do that," answered Jerry.

  "Good night, Mr. Carton," said the man of business. "Good night, Mr.
Darnay. Shall we ever see such a night again, together!"

  Perhaps. Perhaps, see the great crowd of people with its rush and
roar, bearing down upon them, too.

  VII

  MONSEIGNEUR IN TOWN

  MONSEIGNEUR, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held
his fortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris. Monseigneur was
in his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest of
Holiests to the crowd of worshippers in the suite of rooms without.
Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate. Monseigneur could swallow
a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullen minds
supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, his morning's
chocolate could not so much as get into the throat of Monseigneur,
without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook.

  Yes. It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration, and
the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two gold watches
in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set by
Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips. One
lacquey carried the chocolate-pot into the sacred presence; a
second, milled and frothed the chocolate with the little instrument he
bore for that function; a third, presented the favoured napkin; a
fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out. It
was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these
attendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under the admiring
Heavens. Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheon if his
chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he must have
died of two.

  Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where the
Comedy and the Grand Opera were charmingly represented. Monseigneur
was out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company. So
polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that the Comedy and the
Grand Opera had far more influence with him in the tiresome articles
of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs of all France. A
happy circumstance for France, as the like always is for all countries
similarly favoured!- always was for England (by way of example), in
the regretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it.

  Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business,
which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particular
public business, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea that it
must all go his way- tend to his own power and pocket. Of his
pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the other truly
noble idea, that the world was made for them. The text of his order
(altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much)
ran: "The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur."

  Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept
into his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both
classes of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General.
As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anything
at all of them, and must consequently let them out to somebody who
could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich,
and Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, was
growing poor. Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent,
while there was yet time to ward off the impending veil, the
cheapest garment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize
upon a very rich Farmer-General, poor in family. Which Farmer-General,
carrying an appropriate cane with a golden apple on the top of it, was
now among the company in the outer rooms, much prostrated before by
mankind- always excepting superior mankind of the blood of
Monseigneur, who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the
loftiest contempt.

  A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General. Thirty horses stood in his
stables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women
waited on his wife. As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder and
forage where he could, the Farmer-General- howsoever his matrimonial
relations conduced to social morality- was at least the greatest
reality among the personages who attended at the hotel of
Monseigneur that day.

  For, the rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned
with every device of decoration that the taste and skin of the time
could achieve, were, in truth, not a sound business; considered with
any reference to the scarecrows in the rags and nightcaps elsewhere
(and not so far off, either, but that the watching towers of Notre
Dame, almost equidistant from the two extremes, could see them
both), they would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable business-
if that could have been anybody's business, at the house of
Monseigneur. Military officers destitute of military knowledge;
naval officers with no idea of a ship; civil officers without a notion
of affairs; brazen ecclesiastics, of the worst world worldly, with
sensual eyes, loose tongues, and looser lives; all totally unfit for
their several callings all lying horribly in pretending to belong to
them, but all nearly or remotely of the order of Monseigneur, and
therefore foisted on all public employments from which anything was to
be got; these were to be told off by the score and the score. People
not immediately connected with Monseigneur or the State, yet equally
unconnected with anything that was real, or with lives passed in
travelling by any straight road to any true earthly end, were no
less abundant. Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty
remedies for imaginary disorders that never existed, smiled upon their
courtly patients in the ante-chambers of Monseigneur. Projectors who
had discovered every kind of remedy for the little evils with which
the State was touched, except the remedy of setting to work in earnest
to root out a single sin, poured their distracting babble into any
ears they could lay hold of, at the reception of Monseigneur.
Unbelieving Philosophers who were remodelling the world with words,
and making card-towers of Babel to scale the skies with, talked with
Unbelieving Chemists who had an eye on the transmutation of metals, at
this wonderful gathering accumulated by Monseigneur. Exquisite
gentlemen of the finest breeding, which was at that remarkable time-
and has been since- to be known by its fruits of indifference to every
natural subject of human interest, were in the most exemplary state of
exhaustion, at the hotel of Monseigneur. Such homes had these
various notabilities left behind them in the fine world of Paris, that
the spies among the assembled devotees of Monseigneur- forming a
goodly half of the polite company- would have found it hard to
discover among the angels of that sphere one solitary wife, who, in
her manners and appearance, owned to being a Mother. Indeed, except
for the mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into this world-
which does not go far towards the realisation of the name of mother-
there was no such thing known to the fashion. Peasant women kept the
unfashionable babies close, and brought them up, and charming
grandmammas of sixty dressed and supped as at twenty.

  The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in
attendance upon Monseigneur. In the outermost room were half a dozen
exceptional people who had had, for a few years, some vague
misgiving in them that things in general were going rather wrong. As a
promising way of setting them right, half of the half-dozen had become
members of a fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even then
considering within themselves whether they should foam, rage, roar,
and turn cataleptic on the spot- thereby setting up a highly
intelligible finger-post to the Future, for Monseigneur's guidance.
Besides these Dervishes, were other three who had rushed into
another sect, which mended matters with a jargon about "the Centre
of Truth:" holding that Man had got out of the Centre of Truth-
which did not need much demonstration- but had not got out of the
Circumference, and that he was to be kept from flying out of the
Circumference, and was even to be shoved back into the Centre, by
fasting and seeing of spirits. Among these, accordingly, much
discoursing with spirits went on- and it did a world of good which
never became manifest.

  But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel of
Monseigneur were perfectly dressed. If the Day of Judgment had only
been ascertained to be a dress day, everybody there would have been
eternally correct. Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up of
hair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended,
such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to the
sense of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever.
The exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendent
trinkets that chinked as they languidly moved; these golden fetters
rang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and
with the rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, there was a
flutter in the air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring
hunger far away.

  Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping
all things in their places. Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball
that was never to leave off. From the Palace of the Tuileries, through
Monseigneur and the whole Court, through the Chambers, the Tribunals
of Justice, and all society (except the scarecrows), the Fancy Ball
descended to the Common Executioner: who, in pursuance of the charm,
was required to officiate "frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat,
pumps, and white silk stockings." At the gallows and the wheel-the axe
was a rarity- Monsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode among his
brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and the rest,
to call him, presided in this dainty dress. And who among the
company at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred and
eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system rooted
in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and white-silk
stockinged, would see the very stars out!

  Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken his
chocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrown
open, and issued forth. Then, what submission, what cringing and
fawning, what servility, what abject humiliation! As to bowing down in
body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven- which may
have been one among other reasons why the worshippers of Monseigneur
never troubled it.

  Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on one
happy slave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affably
passed through his rooms to the remote region of the Circumference
of Truth. There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in
due course of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by the
chocolate sprites, and was seen no more.

  The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a little
storm, and the precious little bells went ringing down-stairs. There
was soon but one person left of all the crowd, and he, with his hat
under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed among the
mirrors on his way out.

  "I devote you," said this person, stopping at the last door on his
way, and turning in the direction of the sanctuary, "to the Devil!"

  With that, he shook the snuff from his fingers as if he had shaken
the dust from his feet, and quietly walked down-stairs.

  He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in
manner, and with a face like a fine mask. A face of a transparent
paleness; every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on
it. The nose, beautifully formed otherwise, was very slightly
pinched at the top of each nostril. In those two compressions, or
dints, the only little change that the face ever showed, resided. They
persisted in changing colour sometimes, and they would be occasionally
dilated and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then, they
gave a look of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance.
Examined with attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be
found in the line of the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the
eyes, being much too horizontal and thin; still, in the effect of
the face made, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one.

  Its owner went down-stairs into the courtyard, got into his
carriage, and drove away. Not many people had talked with him at the
reception; he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might
have been warmer in his manner. It appeared, under the
circumstances, rather agreeable to him to see the common people
dispersed before his horses, and often barely escaping from being
run down. His man drove as if he were charging an enemy, and the
furious recklessness of the man brought no check into the face, or
to the lips, of the master. The complaint had sometimes made itself
audible, even in that deaf city and dumb age, that, in the narrow
streets without footways, the fierce patrician custom of hard
driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgar in a barbarous manner.
But, few cared enough for that to think of it a second time, and, in
this matter, as in all others, the common wretches were left to get
out of their difficulties as they could.

  With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of
consideration not easy to be understood in these days, the carriage
dashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screaming
before it, and men clutching each other and clutching children out
of its way. At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one of
its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and there was a loud cry
from a number of voices, and the horses reared and plunged.

  But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would not
have stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave
their wounded behind, and why not? But the frightened valet had got
down in a hurry, and there were twenty hands at the horses' bridles.

  "What has gone wrong?" said Monsieur, calmly looking out.

  A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the
feet of the horses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain,
and was down in the mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal.

  "Pardon, Monsieur the Marquis!" said a ragged and submissive man,
"it is a child."

  "Why does he make that abominable noise? Is it his child?"

  "Excuse me, Monsieur the Marquis- it is a pity- yes."

  The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where it
was, into a space some ten or twelve yards square. As the tall man
suddenly got up from the ground, and came running at the carriage,
Monsieur the Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his
sword-hilt.

  "Killed!" shrieked the man, in wild desperation, extending both arms
at their length above his head, and staring at him. "Dead!"

  The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis. There
was nothing revealed by the many eyes that looked at him but
watchfulness and eagerness; there was no visible menacing or anger.
Neither did the people say anything; after the first cry, they had
been silent, and they remained so. The voice of the submissive man who
had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission. Monsieur
the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had been mere
rats come out of their holes.

  He took out his purse.

  "It is extraordinary to me," said he, "that you people cannot take
care of yourselves and your children. One or the other of you is for
ever in the way. How do I know what injury you have done my horses.
See! Give him that."

  He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the heads
craned forward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell. The
tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, "Dead!"

  He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom the
rest made way. On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon his
shoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to the fountain, where some
women were stooping over the motionless bundle, and moving gently
about it. They were as silent, however, as the men.

  "I know all, I know all," said the last comer. "Be a brave man, my
Gaspard! It is better for the poor little plaything to die so, than to
live. It has died in a moment without pain. Could it have lived an
hour as happily?"

  "You are a philosopher, you there," said the Marquis, smiling.
"How do they call you?"

  "They call me Defarge."

  "Of what trade?"

  "Monsieur the Marquis, vendor of wine."

  "Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine," said the Marquis,
throwing him another gold coin, "and spend it as you will. The
horses there; are they right?"

  Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieur
the Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away
with the air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some common
thing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when his
ease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage, and
ringing on its floor.

  "Hold!" said Monsieur the Marquis. "Hold the horses! Who threw
that?"

  He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood,
a moment before; but the wretched father was grovelling on his face on
the pavement in that spot, and the figure that stood beside him was
the figure of a dark stout woman, knitting.

  "You dogs!" said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged
front, except as to the spots on his nose: "I would ride over any of
you very willingly, and exterminate you from the earth. If I knew
which rascal threw at the carriage, and if that brigand were
sufficiently near it, he should be crushed under the wheels."

  So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their
experience of what such a man could do to them, within the law and
beyond it, that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised.
Among the men, not one. But the woman who stood knitting looked up
steadily, and looked the Marquis in the face. It was not for his
dignity to notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and
over all the other rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and
gave the word "Go on!"

  He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quick
succession; the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General, the
Doctor, the Lawyer, the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, the Comedy, the
whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, came whirling by. The
rats had crept out of their holes to look on, and they remained
looking on for hours; soldiers and police often passing between them
and the spectacle, and making a barrier behind which they slunk, and
through which they peeped. The father had long ago taken up his bundle
and hidden himself away with it, when the women who had tended the
bundle while it lay on the base of the fountain, sat there watching
the running of the water and the rolling of the Fancy Ball- when the
one woman who had stood conspicuous, knitting, still knitted on with
the steadfastness of Fate. The water of the fountain ran, the swift
river ran, the day ran into evening, so much life in the city ran into
death according to rule, time and tide waited for no man, the rats
were sleeping close together in their dark holes again, the Fancy Ball
was lighted up at supper, all things ran their course.

  VIII

  MONSEIGNEUR IN THE COUNTRY

  A BEAUTIFUL LANDSCAPE, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant.
Patches of poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor
peas and beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for
wheat. On inanimate nature, as on the men and women who cultivated it,
a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetating
unwillingly- a dejected disposition to give up, and wither away.

  Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have
been lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions,
fagged up a steep hill. A blush on the countenance of Monsieur the
Marquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not from
within; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond his
control- the setting sun.

  The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when
it gained the hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson.
"It will die out," said Monsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands,
"directly."

  In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment. When the
heavy drag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid
down hill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow
departed quickly; the sun and the Marquis going down together, there
was no glow left when the drag was taken off.

  But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little
village at the bottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a
churchtower, a windmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a
fortress on it used as a prison. Round upon all these darkening
objects as the night drew on, the Marquis looked, with the air of
one who was coming near home.

  The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor
tannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses, poor
fountain, all usual poor appointments. It had its poor people too. All
poor a its people were poor, and many of them were sitting at their
doors, shredding spare onions and the like for supper, while many were
at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any such small
yieldings of the earth that could be eaten. Expressive signs of what
made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the tax for
the church, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, were to
be paid here and to be paid there, according to solemn inscription
in the little village, until the wonder was, that there was any
village left unswallowed.

  Few children were to be seen, and no dogs. As to the men and
women, their choice on earth was stated in the prospect- Life on the
lowest terms that could sustain it, down in the little village under
the ill; or captivity and Death in the dominant prison on the crag.

  Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of his
postilions' whips, which twined snake-like about their heads in the
evening air, as if he came attended by the Furies, Monsieur the
Marquis drew up in his travelling carriage at the posting-house
gate. It was hard by the fountain, and the peasants suspended their
operations to look at him. He looked at them, and saw in them, without
knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face and
figure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an English
superstition which should survive the truth through the best part of a
hundred years.

  Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces that
drooped before him, as the like of himself had drooped before
Monseigneur of the Court- only the difference was, that these faces
drooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate- when a grizzled mender
of the roads joined the group.

  "Bring me hither that fellow!" said the Marquis to the courier.

  The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and the other fellows closed
round to look and listen, in the manner of the people at the Paris
fountain.

  "I passed you on the road?"

  "Monseigneur, it is true. I had the honour of being passed on the
road."

  "Coming up the hill, and at the top of the hill, both?

  "Monseigneur, it is true."

  "What did you look at, so fixedly?"

  "Monseigneur, I looked at the man."

  He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under
the carriage. All his fellows stooped to look under the carriage.

  "What man, pig? And why look there?"

  "Pardon, Monseigneur; he swung by the chain of the shoe- the drag."

  "Who?" demanded the traveller.

  "Monseigneur, the man."

  "May the Devil carry away these idiots! How do you call the man? You
know all the men of this part of the country. Who was he?"

  "Your clemency, Monseigneur! He was not of this part of the country.
Of all the days of my life, I never saw him."

  "Swinging by the chain? To be suffocated?"

  "With your gracious permission, that was the wonder of it,
Monseigneur. His head hanging over- like this!"

  He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with
his face thrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then
recovered himself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow.

  "What was he like?"

  "Monseigneur, he was whiter than the miller. All covered with
dust, white as a spectre, tall as a spectre!"

  The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd; but
all eyes, without comparing notes with other eyes, looked at
Monsieur the Marquis. Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectre
on his conscience.

  "Truly, you did well," said the Marquis, felicitously sensible
that such vermin were not to ruffle him, "to see a thief
accompanying my carriage, and not open that great mouth of yours. Bah!
Put him aside, Monsieur Gabelle!"

  Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing
functionary united; he had come out with great obsequiousness to
assist at this examination, and had held the examined by the drapery
of his arm in an official manner.

  "Bah! Go aside!" said Monsieur Gabelle.

  "Lay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your village
to-night, and be sure that his business is honest, Gabelle."

  "Monseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders."

  "Did he run away, fellow?- where is that Accursed?"

  The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozen
particular friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap. Some
half-dozen other particular friends promptly hauled him out, and
presented him breathless to Monsieur the Marquis.

  "Did the man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for the drag?"

  "Monseigneur, he precipitated himself over the hill-side, head
first, as a person plunges into the river."

  "See to it, Gabelle. Go on!"

  The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among the
wheels, like sheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they were lucky
to save their skins and bones; they had very little else to save, or
they might not have been so fortunate.

  The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and
up the rise beyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill.
Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward
among the many sweet scents of a summer night. The postilions, with
a thousand gossamer gnats circling about them in lieu of the Furies,
quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips; the valet
walked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead
into the dim distance.

  At the steepest point of the hill there was a little
burial-ground, with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on
it; it was a poor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic
carver, but he had studied the figure from the life- his own life,
maybe- for it was dreadfully spare and thin.

  To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been
growing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling. She
turned her head as the carriage came up to her, rose quickly, and
presented herself at the carriage-door.

  "It is you, Monseigneur! Monseigneur, a petition."

  With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face,
Monseigneur looked out.

  "How, then! What is it? Always petitions!"

  "Monseigneur. For the love of the great God! My husband, the
forester."

  "What of your husband, the forester? Always the same with you
people. He cannot pay something?"

  "He has paid all, Monseigneur. He is dead."

  "Well! He is quiet. Can I restore him to you?"

  "Alas, no, Monseigneur! But he lies yonder, under a little heap of
poor grass."

  "Well?"

  "Monseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?"

  "Again, well?"

  She looked an old woman, but was young. Her manner was one of
passionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands
together with wild energy, and laid one of them on the
carriage-door- tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human
breast, and could be expected to feel the appealing touch.

  "Monseigneur, hear me! Monseigneur, hear my petition! My husband
died of want; so many die of want; so many more will die of want."

  "Again, well? Can I feed them?"

  "Monseigneur, the good God knows; but I don't ask it. My petition
is, that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband's name, may be
placed over him to show where he lies. Otherwise, the place will be
quickly forgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of the same
malady, I shall be laid under some other heap of poor grass.
Monseigneur, they are so many, they increase so fast, there is so much
want. Monseigneur! Monseigneur!"

  The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had broken
into a brisk trot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she was left
far behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, was rapidly
diminishing the league or two of distance that remained between him
and his chateau.

  The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and
rose, as the rain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and
toil-worn group at the fountain not far away; to whom the mender of
roads, with the aid of the blue cap without which he was nothing,
still enlarged upon his man like a spectre, as long as they could bear
it. By degrees, as they could bear no more, they dropped off one by
one, and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as the
casements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot up
into the sky instead of having been extinguished.

  The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging
trees, was upon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow
was exchanged for the light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped,
and the great door of his chateau was opened to him.

  "Monsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?"

  "Monseigneur, not yet."

  IX

  THE GORGON'S HEAD

  IT WAS a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the
Marquis, with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone
sweeps of staircase meeting in a stone terrace before the principal
door. A stony business altogether, with heavy stone balustrades, and
stone urns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads
of lions, in all directions. As if the Gorgon's head had surveyed
it, when it was finished, two centuries ago.

  Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeau
preceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darkness
to elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great
pile of stable building away among the trees. All else was so quiet,
that the flambeau carried up the steps, and the other flambeau held at
the great door, burnt as if they were in a close room of state,
instead of being in the open night-air. Other sound than the owl's
voice there was none, save the falling of a fountain into its stone
basin; for, it was one of those dark nights that hold their breath
by the hour together, and then heave a long low sigh, and hold their
breath again.

  The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis
crossed a hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives
of the chase; grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips,
of which many a peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt the
weight when his lord was angry.

  Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for the
night, Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before,
went up the staircase to a door in a corridor. This thrown open,
admitted him to his own private apartment of three rooms: his
bed-chamber and two others. High vaulted rooms with cool uncarpeted
floors, great dogs upon the hearths for the burning of wood in
winter time, and all luxuries befitting the state of a marquis in a
luxurious age and country. The fashion of the last Louis but one, of
the line that was never to break- the fourteenth Louis- was
conspicuous in their rich furniture; but, it was diversified by many
objects that were illustrations of old pages in the history of France.

  A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a
round room, in one of the chateau's four extinguisher-topped towers. A
small lofty room, with its window wide open, and the wooden
jalousie-blinds closed, so that the dark night only showed in slight
horizontal lines of black, alternating with their broad lines of stone
colour.

  "My nephew," said the Marquis, glancing at the supper preparation;
"they said he was not arrived."

  Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur.

  "Ah! It is not probable he will arrive to-night; nevertheless, leave
the table as it is. I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour."

  In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone to
his sumptuous and choice supper. His chair was opposite to the window,
and he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass of Bordeaux to
his lips, when he put it down.

  "What is that?" he calmly asked, looking with attention at the
horizontal lines of black and stone colour.

  "Monseigneur? That?"

  "Outside the blinds. Open the blinds."

  It was done.

  "Well?"

  "Monseigneur, it is nothing. The trees and the night are all that
are here."

  The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked out
into the vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him,
looking round for instructions.

  "Good," said the imperturbable master. "Close them again."

  That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper. He was
half way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in his hand,
hearing the sound of wheels. It came on briskly, and came up to the
front of the chateau.

  "Ask who is arrived."

  It was the nephew of Monseigneur. He had been some few leagues
behind Monseigneur, early in the afternoon. He had diminished the
distance rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur on
the road. He had heard of Monseigneur, at the posting-houses, as being
before him.

  He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then
and there, and that he was prayed to come to it. In a little while
he came. He had been known in England as Charles Darnay.

  Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but they did not shake
hands.

  "You left Paris yesterday, sir?" he said to Monseigneur, as he
took his seat at table.

  "Yesterday. And you?"

  "I come direct."

  "From London?"

  "Yes."

  "You have been a long time coming," said the Marquis, with a smile.

  "On the contrary; I come direct."

  "Pardon me! I mean, not a long time on the journey; a long time
intending the journey."

  "I have been detained by"- the nephew stopped a moment in his
answer- "various business."

  "Without doubt," said the polished uncle.

  So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between
them. When coffee had been served and they were alone together, the
nephew, looking at the uncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was
like a fine mask, opened a conversation.

  "I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object
that took me away. It carried me into great and unexpected peril;
but it is a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it
would have sustained me.

  "Not to death," said the uncle; "it is not necessary to say, to
death."

  "I doubt, sir," returned the nephew, "whether, if it had carried
me to the utmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me
there."

  The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the fine
straight lines in the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; the uncle
made a graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly a slight form
of good breeding that it was not reassuring.

  "Indeed, sir," pursued the nephew, "for anything I know, you may
have expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to the
suspicious circumstances that surrounded me."

  "No, no, no," said the uncle, pleasantly.

  "But, however that may be," resumed the nephew, glancing at him with
deep distrust, "I know that your diplomacy would stop me by any means,
and would know no scruple as to means."

  "My friend, I told you so," said the uncle, with a fine pulsation in
the two marks. "Do me the favour to recall that I told you so, long
ago."

  "I recall it."

  "Thank you," said the Marquis- very sweetly indeed.

  His tone lingered in the air, almost like the tone of a musical
instrument.

  "In effect, sir," pursued the nephew, "I believe it to be at once
your bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a
prison in France here."

  "I do not quite understand," returned the uncle, sipping his coffee.
"Dare I ask you to explain?"

  "I believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court, and
had not been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter de
cachet would have sent me to some fortress indefinitely."

  "It is possible," said the uncle, with great calmness. "For the
honour of the family, I could even resolve to incommode you to that
extent. Pray excuse me!"

  "I perceive that, happily for me, the Reception of the day before
yesterday was, as usual, a cold one," observed the nephew.

  "I would not say happily, my friend," returned the uncle, with
refined politeness; "I would not be sure of that. A good opportunity
for consideration, surrounded by the advantages of solitude, might
influence your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence
it for yourself. But it is useless to discuss the question. I am, as
you say, at a disadvantage. These little instruments of correction,
these gentle aids to the power and honour of families, these slight
favours that might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now by
interest and importunity. They are sought by so many, and they are
granted (comparatively) to so few! It used not to be so, but France in
all such things is changed for the worse. Our not remote ancestors
held the right of life and death over the surrounding vulgar. From
this room, many such dogs have been taken out to be hanged; in the
next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to our knowledge, was poniarded on
the spot for professing some insolent delicacy respecting his
daughter- his daughter? We have lost many privileges; a new philosophy
has become the mode; and the assertion of our station, in these
days, might (I do not go so far as to say would, but might) cause us
real inconvenience. All very bad, very bad!"

  The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head;
as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still
containing himself, that great means of regeneration.

  "We have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in the
modern time also," said the nephew, gloomily, "that I believe our name
to be more detested than any name in France."

  "Let us hope so," said the uncle. "Detestation of the high is the
involuntary homage of the low."

  "There is not," pursued the nephew, in his former tone, "a face I
can look at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me
with any deference on it but the dark deference of fear and slavery."

  "A compliment," said the Marquis, "to the grandeur of the family,
merited by the manner in which the family has sustained its
grandeur. Hah!" And he took another gentle little pinch of snuff,
and lightly crossed his legs.

  But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his
eyes thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked
at him sideways with a stronger concentration of keenness,
closeness, and dislike, than was comportable with its wearer's
assumption of indifference.

  "Repression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of
fear and slavery, my friend," observed the Marquis, "will keep the
dogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof," looking up to it,
"shuts out the sky."

  That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed. If a picture of
the chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty
like it as they too were to be a very few years hence, could have been
shown to him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim his own
from the ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked ruins. As for the roof
he vaunted, he might have found that shutting out the sky in a new
way- to wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodies into which its lead
was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousand muskets.

  "Meanwhile," said the Marquis, "I will preserve the honour and
repose of the family. if you will not. But you must be fatigued. Shall
we terminate our conference for the night?"

  "A moment more."

  "An hour, if you please."

  "Sir," said the nephew, "we have done wrong, and are reaping the
fruits of wrong."

  "We have done wrong?" repeated the Marquis, with an inquiring smile,
and delicately pointing, first to his nephew, then to himself.

  "Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much
account to both of us, in such different ways. Even in my father's
time, we did a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who
came between us and our pleasure, whatever it was. Why need I speak of
my father's time, when it is equally yours? Can I separate my father's
twin-brother, joint inheritor, and next successor, from himself?"

  "Death has done that!" said the Marquis.

  "And has left me," answered the nephew, "bound to a system that is
frightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to
execute the last request of my dear mother's lips, and obey the last
look of my dear mother's eyes, which implored me to have mercy and
to redress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain."

  "Seeking them from me, my nephew," said the Marquis, touching him on
the breast with his forefinger- they were now standing by the
hearth- "you will for ever seek them in vain, be assured."

  Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was
cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking
quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand. Once again he
touched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine point of
a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through the
body, and said,

  "My friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I have
lived."

  When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put
his box in his pocket.

  "Better to be a rational creature," he added then, after ringing a
small bell on the table, "and accept your natural destiny. But you are
lost, Monsieur Charles, I see."

  "This property and France are lost to me," said the nephew, sadly;
"I renounce them."

  "Are they both yours to renounce? France may be, but is the
property? It is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?"

  "I had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet. If it
passed to me from you, to-morrow--"

  "Which I have the vanity to hope is not probable."

  "-or twenty years hence--"

  "You do me too much honour," said the Marquis; "still, I prefer that
supposition."

  "-I would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere. It is little
to relinquish. What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!"

  "Hah!" said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room.

  "To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity,
under the sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of
waste, mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger,
nakedness, and suffering."

  "Hah!" said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.

  "If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better
qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the
weight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannot
leave it and who have been long wrung to the last point of
endurance, may, in another generation, suffer less; but it is not
for me. There is a curse on it, and on all this land."

  "And you?" said the uncle. "Forgive my curiosity; do you, under your
new philosophy, graciously intend to live?"

  "I must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with
nobility at their backs, may have to do some day- work."

  "In England, for example?"

  "Yes. The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country. The
family name can suffer from me in no other, for I bear it in no
other."

  The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to be
lighted. It now shone brightly, through the door of communication. The
Marquis looked that way, and listened for the retreating step of his
valet.

  "England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you
have prospered there," he observed then, turning his calm face to
his nephew with a smile.

  "I have already said, that for my prospering there, I am sensible
I may be indebted to you, sir. For the rest, it is my Refuge."

  "They say, those boastful English, that it is the Refuge of many.
You know a compatriot who has found a Refuge there? A Doctor?"

  "Yes."

  "With a daughter?"

  "Yes."

  "Yes," said the Marquis. "You are fatigued. Good night!"

  As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a
secrecy in his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to
those words, which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly. At
the same time, the thin straight lines of the setting of the eyes, and
the thin straight lips, and the markings in the nose, curved with a
sarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic.

  "Yes," repeated the Marquis. "A Doctor with a daughter. Yes. So
commences the new philosophy! You are fatigued. Good night!"

  It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face
outside the chateau as to interrogate that face of his. The nephew
looked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door.

  "Good night!" said the uncle. "I look to the pleasure of seeing
you again in the morning. Good repose! Light Monsieur my nephew to his
chamber there!- And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you
will," he added to himself, before he rang his little bell again,
and summoned his valet to his own bedroom.

  The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro in
his loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that
hot still night. Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet
making no noise on the floor, he moved like a refined tiger:- looked
like some enchanted marquis of the impenitently wicked sort, in story,
whose periodical change into tiger form was either just going off,
or just coming on.

  He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at
the scraps of the day's journey that came unbidden into his mind;
the slow toil up the hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, the
mill, the prison on the crag, the little village in the hollow, the
peasants at the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cap
pointing out the chain under the carriage. That fountain suggested the
Paris fountain, the little bundle lying on the step, the women bending
over it, and the tall man with his arms up, crying, "Dead!"

  "I am cool now," said Monsieur the Marquis, "and may go to bed."

  So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let his
thin gauze curtains fall around him, and heard the night break its
silence with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep.

  The stone faces on the outer walls stared blindly at the black night
for three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in the
stables rattled at their racks, the dogs barked, and the owl made a
noise with very little resemblance in it to the noise conventionally
assigned to the owl by men-poets. But it is the obstinate custom of
such creatures hardly ever to say what is set down for them.

  For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion and
human, stared blindly at the night. Dead darkness lay on all the
landscape, dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust on all
the roads. The burial-place had got to the pass that its little
heaps of poor grass were undistinguishable from one another; the
figure on the Cross might have come down, for anything that could be
seen of it. In the village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep.
Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as the starved usually do, and of ease
and rest, as the driven slave and the yoked ox may, its lean
inhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and freed.

  The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and the
fountain at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard- both melting away,
like the minutes that were falling from the spring of Time- through
three dark hours. Then, the grey water of both began to be ghostly
in the light, and the eyes of the stone faces of the chateau were
opened.

  Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of the
still trees, and poured its radiance over the hill. In the glow, the
water of the chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and the stone
faces crimsoned. The carol of the birds was loud and high, and, on the
weather-beaten sill of the great window of the bed-chamber of Monsieur
the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest song with all its
might. At this, the nearest stone face seemed to stare amazed, and,
with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, looked awe-stricken.

  Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village.
Casement windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came
forth shivering- chilled, as yet, by the new sweet air. Then began the
rarely lightened toil of the day among the village population. Some,
to the fountain; some, to the fields; men and women here, to dig and
delve; men and women there, to see to the poor live stock, and lead
the bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by the
roadside. In the church and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two;
attendant on the latter prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfast
among the weeds at its foot.

  The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke
gradually and surely. First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of
the chase had been reddened as of old; then, had gleamed trenchant
in the morning sunshine; now, doors and windows were thrown open,
horses in their stables looked round over their shoulders at the light
and freshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at
iron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at their chains, and reared
impatient to be loosed.

  All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and the
return of morning. Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell of the
chateau, nor the running up and down the stairs; nor the hurried
figures on the terrace; nor the booting and tramping here and there
and everywhere, nor the quick saddling of horses and riding away?

  What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads,
already at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day's
dinner (not much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no
crow's while to peck at, on a heap of stones? Had the birds,
carrying some grains of it to a distance, dropped one over him as they
sow chance seeds? Whether or no, the mender of roads ran, on the
sultry morning, as if for his life, down the hill, knee-high in
dust, and never stopped till he got to the fountain.

  All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about
in their depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no other
emotions than grim curiosity and surprise. The led cows, hastily
brought in and tethered to anything that would hold them, were looking
stupidly on, or lying down chewing the cud of nothing particularly
repaying their trouble, which they had picked up in their
interrupted saunter. Some of the people of the chateau, and some of
those of the posting-house, and all the taxing authorities, were armed
more or less, and were crowded on the other side of the little
street in a purposeless way, that was highly fraught with nothing.
Already, the mender of roads had penetrated into the midst of a
group of fifty particular friends, and was smiting himself in the
breast with his blue cap. What did all this portend, and what
portended the swift hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant
on horseback, and the conveying away of the said Gabelle (double-laden
though the horse was), at a gallop, like a new version of the German
ballad of Leonora?

  It portended that there was one stone face too many, up at the
chateau.

  The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and had
added the one stone face wanting; the stone face for which it had
waited through about two hundred years.

  It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis. It was like a
fine mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified. Driven home
into the heart of the stone figure attached to it, was a knife.
Round its hilt was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled:

  "Drive him fast to his tomb. This, from JACQUES."

  X

  TWO PROMISES

  MORE MONTHS, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr.
Charles Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of the
French language who was conversant with French literature. In this
age, he would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor. He
read with young men who could find any leisure and interest for the
study of a living tongue spoken all over the world, and he
cultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy. He could
write of them, besides, in sound English, and render them into sound
English. Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princes that
had been, and Kings that were to be, were not yet of the Teacher
class, and no ruined nobility had dropped out of Tellson's ledgers, to
turn cooks and carpenters. As a tutor, whose attainments made the
student's way unusually pleasant and profitable, and as an elegant
translator who brought something to his work besides mere dictionary
knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged. He was
well acquainted, moreover, with the circumstances of his country,
and those were of ever-growing interest. So, with great perseverance
and untiring industry, he prospered.

  In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, nor
to lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation,
he would not have prospered. He had expected labour, and he found
it, and did it and made the best of it. In this, his prosperity
consisted.

  A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he read
with undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a
contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek and
Latin through the Custom-house. The rest of his time he passed in
London.

  Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these
days when it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a
man has invariably gone one way- Charles Darnay's way- the way of
the love of a woman.

  He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger. He had never
heard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate
voice; he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when it
was confronted with his own on the edge of the grave that had been dug
for him. But, he had not yet spoken to her on the subject; the
assassination at the deserted chateau far away beyond the heaving
water and the long, long, dusty roads- the solid stone chateau which
had itself become the mere mist of a dream- had been done a year,
and he had never yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosed to
her the state of his heart.

  That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well. It was again
a summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college
occupation, he turned into the quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking
an opportunity of opening his mind to Doctor Manette. It was the close
of the summer day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross.

  He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window. The energy
which had at once supported him under his old sufferings and
aggravated their sharpness, had been gradually restored to him. He was
now a very energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose,
strength of resolution, and vigour of action. In his recovered
energy he was sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first
been in the exercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had
never been frequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.

  He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue
with ease, and was equably cheerful. To him, now entered Charles
Darnay, at sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand.

  "Charles Darnay! I rejoice to see you. We have been counting on your
return these three or four days past. Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton
were both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due."

  "I am obliged to them for their interest in the matter," he
answered, a little coldly as to them, though very warmly as to the
Doctor. "Miss Manette--"

  "Is well," said the Doctor, as he stopped short, "and your return
will delight us all. She has gone out on some household matters, but
will soon be home."

  "Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home. I took the opportunity of
her being from home, to beg to speak to you."

  There was a blank silence.

  "Yes?" said the Doctor, with evident constraint. "Bring your chair
here, and speak on."

  He complied as to the chair, but appeared to find the speaking on
less easy.

  "I have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate
here," so he at length began, "for some year and a half, that I hope
the topic on which I am about to touch may not--"

  He was stayed by the Doctor's putting out his hand to stop him. When
he had kept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:

  "Is Lucie the topic?"

  "She is."

  "It is hard for me to speak of her at any time. It is very hard
for me to hear her spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay."

  "It is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love,
Doctor Manette!" he said deferentially.

  There was another blank silence before her father rejoined:

  "I believe it. I do you justice; I believe it."

  His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that it
originated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that Charles
Darnay hesitated.

  "Shall I go on, sir?"

  Another blank.

  "Yes, go on."

  "You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how
earnestly I say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret
heart, and the hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long
been laden. Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly,
dearly, disinterestedly, devotedly. If ever there were love in the
world, I love her. You have loved yourself; let your old love speak
for me!"

  The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on the
ground. At the last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,
and cried:

  "Not that, sir! Let that be! I adjure you, do not recall that!"

  His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles
Darnay's ears long after he had ceased. He motioned with the hand he
had extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause. The
latter so received it, and remained silent.

  "I ask your pardon," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after
some moments. "I do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be
satisfied of it."

  He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or
raise his eyes. His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair
overshadowed his face:

  "Have you spoken to Lucie?"

  "No."

  "Nor written?"

  "Never."

  "It would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your
self-denial is to be referred to your consideration for her father.
Her father thanks you."

  He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it.

  "I know," said Darnay, respectfully, "how can I fail to know, Doctor
Manette, I who have seen you together from day to day, that between
you and Miss Manette there is an affection so unusual, so touching, so
belonging to the circumstances in which it has been nurtured, that
it can have few parallels, even in the tenderness between a father and
child. I know, Doctor Manette- how can I fail to know- that, mingled
with the affection and duty of a daughter who has become a woman,
there is, in her heart, towards you, all the love and reliance of
infancy itself. I know that, as in her childhood she had no parent, so
she is now devoted to you with all the constancy and fervour of her
present years and character, united to the trustfulness and attachment
of the early days in which you were lost to her. I know perfectly well
that if you had been restored to her from the world beyond this
life, you could hardly be invested, in her sight, with a more sacred
character than that in which you are always with her. I know that when
she is clinging to you, the hands of baby, girl, and woman, all in
one, are round your neck. I know that in loving you she sees and loves
her mother at her own age, sees and loves you at my age, loves her
mother broken-hearted, loves you through your dreadful trial and in
your blessed restoration. I have known this, night and day, since I
have known you in your home."

  Her father sat silent, with his face bent down. His breathing was
a little quickened; but he repressed all other signs of agitation.

  "Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you
with this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne,
as long as it was in the nature of man to do it. I have felt, and do
even now feel, that to bring my love- even mine- between you, is to
touch your history with something not quite so good as itself. But I
love her. Heaven is my witness that I love her!"

  "I believe it," answered her father, mournfully. "I have thought
so before now. I believe it."

  "But, do not believe," said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful
voice struck with a reproachful sound, "that if my fortune were so
cast as that, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at
any time put any separation between her and you, I could or would
breathe a word of what I now say. Besides that I should know it to
be hopeless, I should know it to be a baseness. If I had any such
possibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in my
thoughts, and hidden in my heart- if it ever had been there- if it
ever could be there- I could not now touch this honoured hand."

  He laid his own upon it as he spoke.

  "No, dear Doctor Manette. Like you, a voluntary exile from France;
like you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and
miseries; like you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions,
and trusting in a happier future; I look only to sharing your
fortunes, sharing your Life and home, and being faithful to you to the
death. Not to divide with Lucie her privilege as your child,
companion, and friend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closer
to you, if such a thing can be."

  His touch still lingered on her father's hand. Answering the touch
for a moment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon the
arms of his chair, and looked up for the first time since the
beginning of the conference. A struggle was evidently in his face; a
struggle with that occasional look which had a tendency in it to
dark doubt and dread.

  "You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I
thank you with all my heart, and will open all my heart- or nearly so.
Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?"

  "None. As yet, none."

  "Is it the immediate object of this confidence, that you may at once
ascertain that, with my knowledge?"

  "Not even so. I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks; I
might (mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow."

  "Do you seek any guidance from me?"

  "I ask none, sir. But I have thought it possible that you might have
it in your power, if you should deem it right, to give me some."

  "Do you seek any promise from me?"

  "I do seek that."

  "What is it?"

  "I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope. I well
understand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her
innocent heart- do not think I have the presumption to assume so much-
I could retain no place in it against her love for her father."

  "If that be so, do you see what, on the other hand, is involved in
it?"

  "I understand equally well, that a word from her father in any
suitor's favour, would outweigh herself and all the world. For which
reason, Doctor Manette," said Darnay, modestly but firmly, "I would
not ask that word, to save my life."

  "I am sure of it. Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love,
as well as out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtle
and delicate, and difficult to penetrate. My daughter Lucie is, in
this one respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at the
state of her heart."

  "May I ask, sir, if you think she is--" As he hesitated, her
father supplied the rest.

  "Is sought by any other suitor?"

  "It is what I meant to say."

  Her father considered a Little before he answered:

  "You have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself. Mr. Stryver is here too,
occasionally. If it be at all, it can only be by one of these."

  "Or both," said Darnay.

  "I had not thought of both; I should not think either, likely. You
want a promise from me. Tell me what it is."

  "It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her
own part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you,
you will bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it.
I hope you may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influence
against me. I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I
ask. The condition on which I ask it, and which you have an
undoubted right to require, I will observe immediately."

  "I give the promise," said the Doctor, "without any condition. I
believe your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you have stated
it. I believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not to weaken,
the ties between me and my other and far dearer self. If she should
ever tell me that you are essential to her perfect happiness, I will
give her to you. If there were- Charles Darnay, if there were--"

  The young man had taken his hand gratefully; their bands were joined
as the Doctor spoke:

  "-any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything
whatsoever, new or old, against the man she really loved- the direct
responsibility thereof not lying on his head- they should all be
obliterated for her sake. She is everything to me; more to me than
suffering, more to me than wrong, more to me-- Well! This is idle
talk."

  So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so
strange his fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt
his own hand turn cold in the hand that slowly released and dropped
it.

  "You said something to me," said Doctor Manette, breaking into a
smile. "What was it you said to me?"

  He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of
a condition. Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:

  "Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence
on my part. My present name, though but slightly changed from my
mother's, is not, as you will remember, my own. I wish to tell you
what that is, and why I am in England."

  "Stop!" said the Doctor of Beauvais.

  "I wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and
have no secret from you."

  "Stop!"

  For an instant, the Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; for
another instant, even had his two hands laid on Darnay's lips.

  "Tell me when I ask you, not now. If your suit should prosper, if
Lucie should love you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning.
Do you promise?"

  "Willingly."

  "Give me your hand. She will be home directly, and it is better
she should not see us together to-night. Go! God bless you!"

  It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later
and darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into the room alone-
for Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs- and was surprised to
find his reading-chair empty.

  "My father!" she called to him. "Father dear!"

  Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in
his bedroom. Passing lightly across the intermediate room, she
looked in at his door and came running back frightened, crying to
herself, with her blood all chilled, "What shall I do! What shall I
do!"

  Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at
his door, and softly called to him. The noise ceased at the sound of
her voice, and he presently came out to her, and they walked up and
down together for a long time.

  She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that
night. He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old
unfinished work, were all as usual.

  XI

  A COMPANION PICTURE

  "SYDNEY," said Mr. Stryver, on that selfsame night, or morning, to
his jackal; "mix another bowl of punch; I have something to say to
you."

  Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night
before, and the night before that, and a good many nights in
succession, making a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before
the setting in of the long vacation. The clearance was effected at
last; the Stryver arrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was
got rid of until November should come with its fogs atmospheric and
fogs legal, and bring grist to the mill again.

  Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much
application. It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him
through the night; a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had
preceded the towelling; and he was in a very damaged condition, as
he now pulled his turban off and threw it into the basin in which he
had steeped it at intervals for the last six hours.

  "Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?" said Stryver the
portly, with his hands in his waistband, glancing round from the
sofa where he lay on his back.

  "I am."

  "Now, look here! I am going to tell you something that will rather
surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as
shrewd as you usually do think me. I intend to marry."

  "Do you?"

  "Yes. And not for money. What do you say now?"

  "I don't feel disposed to say much. Who is she?"

  "Guess."

  "Do I know her?"

  "Guess."

  "I am not going to guess, at five o'clock in the morning, with my
brains frying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess,
you must ask me to dinner."

  "Well then, I'll tell you," said Stryver, coming slowly into a
sitting posture. "Sydney, I rather despair of making myself
intelligible to you, because you are such an insensible dog."

  "And you," returned Sydney, busy concocting the punch, "are such a
sensitive and poetical spirit."

  "Come!" rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, "though I don't
prefer any claim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know
better), still I am a tenderer sort of fellow than you."

  "You are a luckier, if you mean that."

  "I don't mean that. I mean I am a man of more- more--"

  "Say gallantry, while you are about it," suggested Carton.

  "Well! I'll say gallantry. My meaning is that I am a man," said
Stryver, inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch, "who
cares more to be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable,
who knows better how to be agreeable, in a woman's society, than you
do."

  "Go on," said Sydney Carton.

  "No; but before I go on," said Stryver, shaking his head in his
bullying way, "I'll have this out with you. You've been at Doctor
Manette's house as much as I have, or more than I have. Why, I have
been ashamed of your moroseness there! Your manners have been of
that silent and sullen and hangdog kind, that, upon my life and
soul, I have been ashamed of you, Sydney!"

  "It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the
bar, to be ashamed of anything," returned Sydney; "you ought to be
much obliged to me."

  "You shall not get off in that way," rejoined Stryver, shouldering
the rejoinder at him; "no, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you- and I
tell you to your face to do you good-that you are a de-vilish
ill-conditioned fellow in that sort of society. You are a disagreeable
fellow."

  Sydney drank a bumper of the punch he had made, and laughed.

  "Look at me!" said Stryver, squaring himself; "I have less need to
make myself agreeable than you have, being more independent in
circumstances. Why do I do it?"

  "I never saw you do it yet," muttered Carton.

  "I do it because it's politic; I do it on principle. And look at me!
I get on."

  "You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"
answered Carton, with a careless air; "I wish you would keep to
that. As to me- will you never understand that I am incorrigible?"

  He asked the question with some appearance of scorn.

  "You have no business to be incorrigible," was his friend's
answer, delivered in no very soothing tone.

  "I have no business to be, at all, that I know of," said Sydney
Carton. "Who is the lady?"

  "Now, don't let my announcement of the name make you
uncomfortable, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with
ostentatious friendliness for the disclosure he was about to make,
"because I know you don't mean half you say; and if you meant it
all, it would be of no importance. I make this little preface, because
you once mentioned the young lady to me in slighting terms."

  "I did?"

  "Certainly; and in these chambers."

  Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent
friend; drank his punch and looked at his complacent friend.

  "You made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll. The
young lady is Miss Manette. If you had been a fellow of any
sensitiveness or delicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I
might have been a little resentful of your employing such a
designation; but you are not. You want that sense altogether;
therefore I am no more annoyed when I think of the expression, than
I should be annoyed by a man's opinion of a picture of mine, who had
no eye for pictures: or of a piece of music of mine, who had no ear
for music."

  Sydney Carton drank the punch at a great rate; drank it by
bumpers, looking at his friend.

  "Now you know all about it, Syd," said Mr. Stryver. "I don't care
about fortune: she is a charming creature, and I have made up my
mind to please myself: on the whole, I think I can afford to please
myself. She will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a
rapidly rising man, and a man of some distinction: it is a piece of
good fortune for her, but she is worthy of good fortune. Are you
astonished?"

  Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I be
astonished?"

  "You approve?"

  Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I not
approve?"

  "Well!" said his friend Stryver, "you take it more easily than I
fancied you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I
thought you would be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this
time that your ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will. Yes,
Sydney, I have had enough of this style of life, with no other as a
change from it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a
home when he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesn't, he can
stay away), and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any
station, and will always do me credit. So I have made up my mind.
And now, Sydney, old boy, I want to say a word to you about your
prospects. You are in a bad way, you know; you really are in a bad
way. You don't know the value of money, you live hard, you'll knock up
one of these days, and be ill and poor; you really ought to think
about a nurse."

  The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look
twice as big as he was, and four times as offensive.

  "Now, let me recommend you," pursued Stryver, "to look it in the
face. I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in
the face, you, in your different way. Marry. Provide somebody to
take care of you. Never mind your having no enjoyment of women's
society, nor understanding of it, nor tact for it. Find out
somebody. Find out some respectable woman with a little property-
somebody in the landlady way, or lodging-letting way- and marry her,
against a rainy day. That's the kind of thing for you. Now think of
it, Sydney."

  "I'll think of it," said Sydney.

  XII

  THE FELLOW OF DELICACY

  MR. STRYVER having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal
of good fortune on the Doctor's daughter, resolved to make her
happiness known to her before he left town for the Long Vacation.
After some mental debating of the point, he came to the conclusion
that it would be as well to get all the preliminaries done with, and
they could then arrange at their leisure whether he should give her
his hand a week or two before Michaelmas Term, or in the little
Christmas vacation between it and Hilary.

  As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but
clearly saw his way to the verdict. Argued with the jury on
substantial worldly grounds- the only grounds ever worth taking into
account-it was a plain case, and had not a weak spot in it. He
called himself for the plaintiff, there was no getting over his
evidence, the counsel for the defendant threw up his brief, and the
jury did not even turn to consider. After trying it, Stryver, C. J.,
was satisfied that no plainer case could be.

  Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with a formal
proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing, to
Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it beloved him to present
himself in Soho, and there declare his noble mind.

  Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the
Temple, while the bloom of the Long Vacation's infancy was still
upon it. Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while
he was yet on Saint Dunstan's side of Temple Bar, bursting in his
full-blown way along the pavement, to the jostlement of all weaker
people, might have seen how safe and strong he was.

  His way taking him past Tellson's, and he both banking at
Tellson's and knowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the
Manettes, it entered Mr. Stryver's mind to enter the bank, and
reveal to Mr. Lorry the brightness of the Soho horizon. So, be
pushed open the door with the weak rattle in its throat, stumbled down
the two steps, got past the two ancient cashiers, and shouldered
himself into the musty back closet where Mr. Lorry sat at great
books ruled for figures, with perpendicular iron bars to his window as
if that were ruled for figures too, and everything under the clouds
were a sum.

  "Halloa!" said Mr. Stryver. "How do you do? I hope you are well!"

  It was Stryver's grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for
any place, or space. He was so much too big for Tellson's, that old
clerks in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance, as
though he squeezed them against the wall. The House itself,
magnificently reading the paper quite in the far-off perspective,
lowered displeased, as if the Stryver head had been butted into its
responsible waistcoat.
