to perdition, we really have a good deal of perdition going on in
our neighbourhood! However, as Mrs. Chillip says, sir, they undergo
a continual punishment; for they are turned inward, to feed upon
their own hearts, and their own hearts are very bad feeding.  Now,
sir, about that brain of yours, if you'll excuse my returning to
it.  Don't you expose it to a good deal of excitement, sir?'

I found it not difficult, in the excitement of Mr. Chillip's own
brain, under his potations of negus, to divert his attention from
this topic to his own affairs, on which, for the next half-hour, he
was quite loquacious; giving me to understand, among other pieces
of information, that he was then at the Gray's Inn Coffee-house to
lay his professional evidence before a Commission of Lunacy,
touching the state of mind of a patient who had become deranged
from excessive drinking.
'And I assure you, sir,' he said, 'I am extremely nervous on such
occasions.  I could not support being what is called Bullied, sir. 
It would quite unman me.  Do you know it was some time before I
recovered the conduct of that alarming lady, on the night of your
birth, Mr. Copperfield?'

I told him that I was going down to my aunt, the Dragon of that
night, early in the morning; and that she was one of the most
tender-hearted and excellent of women, as he would know full well
if he knew her better.  The mere notion of the possibility of his
ever seeing her again, appeared to terrify him.  He replied with a
small pale smile, 'Is she so, indeed, sir?  Really?' and almost
immediately called for a candle, and went to bed, as if he were not
quite safe anywhere else.  He did not actually stagger under the
negus; but I should think his placid little pulse must have made
two or three more beats in a minute, than it had done since the
great night of my aunt's disappointment, when she struck at him
with her bonnet.

Thoroughly tired, I went to bed too, at midnight; passed the next
day on the Dover coach; burst safe and sound into my aunt's old
parlour while she was at tea (she wore spectacles now); and was
received by her, and Mr. Dick, and dear old Peggotty, who acted as
housekeeper, with open arms and tears of joy.  My aunt was mightily
amused, when we began to talk composedly, by my account of my
meeting with Mr. Chillip, and of his holding her in such dread
remembrance; and both she and Peggotty had a great deal to say
about my poor mother's second husband, and 'that murdering woman of
a sister', - on whom I think no pain or penalty would have induced
my aunt to bestow any Christian or Proper Name, or any other
designation.

CHAPTER 60
AGNES

My aunt and I, when we were left alone, talked far into the night. 
How the emigrants never wrote home, otherwise than cheerfully and
hopefully; how Mr. Micawber had actually remitted divers small sums
of money, on account of those 'pecuniary liabilities', in reference
to which he had been so business-like as between man and man; how
Janet, returning into my aunt's service when she came back to
Dover, had finally carried out her renunciation of mankind by
entering into wedlock with a thriving tavern-keeper; and how my
aunt had finally set her seal on the same great principle, by
aiding and abetting the bride, and crowning the marriage-ceremony
with her presence; were among our topics - already more or less
familiar to me through the letters I had had.  Mr. Dick, as usual,
was not forgotten.  My aunt informed me how he incessantly occupied
himself in copying everything he could lay his hands on, and kept
King Charles the First at a respectful distance by that semblance
of employment; how it was one of the main joys and rewards of her
life that he was free and happy, instead of pining in monotonous
restraint; and how (as a novel general conclusion) nobody but she
could ever fully know what he was.

'And when, Trot,' said my aunt, patting the back of my hand, as we
sat in our old way before the fire, 'when are you going over to
Canterbury?'

'I shall get a horse, and ride over tomorrow morning, aunt, unless
you will go with me?'

'No!' said my aunt, in her short abrupt way.  'I mean to stay where
I am.'

Then, I should ride, I said.  I could not have come through
Canterbury today without stopping, if I had been coming to anyone
but her.

She was pleased, but answered, 'Tut, Trot; MY old bones would have
kept till tomorrow!' and softly patted my hand again, as I sat
looking thoughtfully at the fire.

Thoughtfully, for I could not be here once more, and so near Agnes,
without the revival of those regrets with which I had so long been
occupied.  Softened regrets they might be, teaching me what I had
failed to learn when my younger life was all before me, but not the
less regrets.  'Oh, Trot,' I seemed to hear my aunt say once more;
and I understood her better now - 'Blind, blind, blind!'

We both kept silence for some minutes.  When I raised my eyes, I
found that she was steadily observant of me.  Perhaps she had
followed the current of my mind; for it seemed to me an easy one to
track now, wilful as it had been once.

'You will find her father a white-haired old man,' said my aunt,
'though a better man in all other respects - a reclaimed man. 
Neither will you find him measuring all human interests, and joys,
and sorrows, with his one poor little inch-rule now.  Trust me,
child, such things must shrink very much, before they can be
measured off in that way.'

'Indeed they must,' said I.

'You will find her,' pursued my aunt, 'as good, as beautiful, as
earnest, as disinterested, as she has always been.  If I knew
higher praise, Trot, I would bestow it on her.'

There was no higher praise for her; no higher reproach for me.  Oh,
how had I strayed so far away!

'If she trains the young girls whom she has about her, to be like
herself,' said my aunt, earnest even to the filling of her eyes
with tears, 'Heaven knows, her life will be well employed! Useful
and happy, as she said that day! How could she be otherwise than
useful and happy!'

'Has Agnes any -' I was thinking aloud, rather than speaking.

'Well?  Hey?  Any what?' said my aunt, sharply.

'Any lover,' said I.

'A score,' cried my aunt, with a kind of indignant pride.  'She
might have married twenty times, my dear, since you have been
gone!'

'No doubt,' said I.  'No doubt.  But has she any lover who is
worthy of her?  Agnes could care for no other.'

My aunt sat musing for a little while, with her chin upon her hand. 
Slowly raising her eyes to mine, she said:

'I suspect she has an attachment, Trot.'

'A prosperous one?' said I.

'Trot,' returned my aunt gravely, 'I can't say.  I have no right to
tell you even so much.  She has never confided it to me, but I
suspect it.'

She looked so attentively and anxiously at me (I even saw her
tremble), that I felt now, more than ever, that she had followed my
late thoughts.  I summoned all the resolutions I had made, in all
those many days and nights, and all those many conflicts of my
heart.

'If it should be so,' I began, 'and I hope it is-'

'I don't know that it is,' said my aunt curtly.  'You must not be
ruled by my suspicions.  You must keep them secret.  They are very
slight, perhaps.  I have no right to speak.'

'If it should be so,' I repeated, 'Agnes will tell me at her own
good time.  A sister to whom I have confided so much, aunt, will
not be reluctant to confide in me.'

My aunt withdrew her eyes from mine, as slowly as she had turned
them upon me; and covered them thoughtfully with her hand.  By and
by she put her other hand on my shoulder; and so we both sat,
looking into the past, without saying another word, until we parted
for the night.

I rode away, early in the morning, for the scene of my old
school-days.  I cannot say that I was yet quite happy, in the hope
that I was gaining a victory over myself; even in the prospect of
so soon looking on her face again.

The well-remembered ground was soon traversed, and I came into the
quiet streets, where every stone was a boy's book to me.  I went on
foot to the old house, and went away with a heart too full to
enter.  I returned; and looking, as I passed, through the low
window of the turret-room where first Uriah Heep, and afterwards
Mr. Micawber, had been wont to sit, saw that it was a little
parlour now, and that there was no office.  Otherwise the staid old
house was, as to its cleanliness and order, still just as it had
been when I first saw it.  I requested the new maid who admitted
me, to tell Miss Wickfield that a gentleman who waited on her from
a friend abroad, was there; and I was shown up the grave old
staircase (cautioned of the steps I knew so well), into the
unchanged drawing-room.  The books that Agnes and I had read
together, were on their shelves; and the desk where I had laboured
at my lessons, many a night, stood yet at the same old corner of
the table.  All the little changes that had crept in when the Heeps
were there, were changed again.  Everything was as it used to be,
in the happy time.

I stood in a window, and looked across the ancient street at the
opposite houses, recalling how I had watched them on wet
afternoons, when I first came there; and how I had used to
speculate about the people who appeared at any of the windows, and
had followed them with my eyes up and down stairs, while women went
clicking along the pavement in pattens, and the dull rain fell in
slanting lines, and poured out of the water-spout yonder, and
flowed into the road.  The feeling with which I used to watch the
tramps, as they came into the town on those wet evenings, at dusk,
and limped past, with their bundles drooping over their shoulders
at the ends of sticks, came freshly back to me; fraught, as then,
with the smell of damp earth, and wet leaves and briar, and the
sensation of the very airs that blew upon me in my own toilsome
journey.

The opening of the little door in the panelled wall made me start
and turn.  Her beautiful serene eyes met mine as she came towards
me.  She stopped and laid her hand upon her bosom, and I caught her
in my arms.

'Agnes! my dear girl! I have come too suddenly upon you.'

'No, no! I am so rejoiced to see you, Trotwood!'

'Dear Agnes, the happiness it is to me, to see you once again!'

I folded her to my heart, and, for a little while, we were both
silent.  Presently we sat down, side by side; and her angel-face
was turned upon me with the welcome I had dreamed of, waking and
sleeping, for whole years.

She was so true, she was so beautiful, she was so good, - I owed
her so much gratitude, she was so dear to me, that I could find no
utterance for what I felt.  I tried to bless her, tried to thank
her, tried to tell her (as I had often done in letters) what an
influence she had upon me; but all my efforts were in vain.  My
love and joy were dumb.

With her own sweet tranquillity, she calmed my agitation; led me
back to the time of our parting; spoke to me of Emily, whom she had
visited, in secret, many times; spoke to me tenderly of Dora's
grave.  With the unerring instinct of her noble heart, she touched
the chords of my memory so softly and harmoniously, that not one
jarred within me; I could listen to the sorrowful, distant music,
and desire to shrink from nothing it awoke.  How could I, when,
blended with it all, was her dear self, the better angel of my
life?

'And you, Agnes,' I said, by and by.  'Tell me of yourself.  You
have hardly ever told me of your own life, in all this lapse of
time!'

'What should I tell?' she answered, with her radiant smile.  'Papa
is well.  You see us here, quiet in our own home; our anxieties set
at rest, our home restored to us; and knowing that, dear Trotwood,
you know all.'

'All, Agnes?' said I.

She looked at me, with some fluttering wonder in her face.

'Is there nothing else, Sister?' I said.

Her colour, which had just now faded, returned, and faded again. 
She smiled; with a quiet sadness, I thought; and shook her head.

I had sought to lead her to what my aunt had hinted at; for,
sharply painful to me as it must be to receive that confidence, I
was to discipline my heart, and do my duty to her.  I saw, however,
that she was uneasy, and I let it pass.

'You have much to do, dear Agnes?'

'With my school?' said she, looking up again, in all her bright
composure.

'Yes.  It is laborious, is it not?'

'The labour is so pleasant,' she returned, 'that it is scarcely
grateful in me to call it by that name.'

'Nothing good is difficult to you,' said I.

Her colour came and went once more; and once more, as she bent her
head, I saw the same sad smile.

'You will wait and see papa,' said Agnes, cheerfully, 'and pass the
day with us?  Perhaps you will sleep in your own room?  We always
call it yours.'

I could not do that, having promised to ride back to my aunt's at
night; but I would pass the day there, joyfully.

'I must be a prisoner for a little while,' said Agnes, 'but here
are the old books, Trotwood, and the old music.'

'Even the old flowers are here,' said I, looking round; 'or the old
kinds.'

'I have found a pleasure,' returned Agnes, smiling, 'while you have
been absent, in keeping everything as it used to be when we were
children.  For we were very happy then, I think.'

'Heaven knows we were!' said I.

'And every little thing that has reminded me of my brother,' said
Agnes, with her cordial eyes turned cheerfully upon me, 'has been
a welcome companion.  Even this,' showing me the basket-trifle,
full of keys, still hanging at her side, 'seems to jingle a kind of
old tune!'

She smiled again, and went out at the door by which she had come.

It was for me to guard this sisterly affection with religious care. 
It was all that I had left myself, and it was a treasure.  If I
once shook the foundations of the sacred confidence and usage, in
virtue of which it was given to me, it was lost, and could never be
recovered.  I set this steadily before myself.  The better I loved
her, the more it behoved me never to forget it.

I walked through the streets; and, once more seeing my old
adversary the butcher - now a constable, with his staff hanging up
in the shop - went down to look at the place where I had fought
him; and there meditated on Miss Shepherd and the eldest Miss
Larkins, and all the idle loves and likings, and dislikings, of
that time.  Nothing seemed to have survived that time but Agnes;
and she, ever a star above me, was brighter and higher.

When I returned, Mr. Wickfield had come home, from a garden he had,
a couple of miles or so out of town, where he now employed himself
almost every day.  I found him as my aunt had described him.  We
sat down to dinner, with some half-dozen little girls; and he
seemed but the shadow of his handsome picture on the wall.

The tranquillity and peace belonging, of old, to that quiet ground
in my memory, pervaded it again.  When dinner was done, Mr.
Wickfield taking no wine, and I desiring none, we went up-stairs;
where Agnes and her little charges sang and played, and worked. 
After tea the children left us; and we three sat together, talking
of the bygone days.

'My part in them,' said Mr. Wickfield, shaking his white head, 'has
much matter for regret - for deep regret, and deep contrition,
Trotwood, you well know.  But I would not cancel it, if it were in
my power.'

I could readily believe that, looking at the face beside him.

'I should cancel with it,' he pursued, 'such patience and devotion,
such fidelity, such a child's love, as I must not forget, no! even
to forget myself.'

'I understand you, sir,' I softly said.  'I hold it - I have always
held it - in veneration.'

'But no one knows, not even you,' he returned, 'how much she has
done, how much she has undergone, how hard she has striven.  Dear
Agnes!'

She had put her hand entreatingly on his arm, to stop him; and was
very, very pale.

'Well, well!' he said with a sigh, dismissing, as I then saw, some
trial she had borne, or was yet to bear, in connexion with what my
aunt had told me.  'Well! I have never told you, Trotwood, of her
mother.  Has anyone?'

'Never, sir.'

'It's not much - though it was much to suffer.  She married me in
opposition to her father's wish, and he renounced her.  She prayed
him to forgive her, before my Agnes came into this world.  He was
a very hard man, and her mother had long been dead.  He repulsed
her.  He broke her heart.'

Agnes leaned upon his shoulder, and stole her arm about his neck.

'She had an affectionate and gentle heart,' he said; 'and it was
broken.  I knew its tender nature very well.  No one could, if I
did not.  She loved me dearly, but was never happy.  She was always
labouring, in secret, under this distress; and being delicate and
downcast at the time of his last repulse - for it was not the
first, by many - pined away and died.  She left me Agnes, two weeks
old; and the grey hair that you recollect me with, when you first
came.'  He kissed Agnes on her cheek.

'My love for my dear child was a diseased love, but my mind was all
unhealthy then.  I say no more of that.  I am not speaking of
myself, Trotwood, but of her mother, and of her.  If I give you any
clue to what I am, or to what I have been, you will unravel it, I
know.  What Agnes is, I need not say.  I have always read something
of her poor mother's story, in her character; and so I tell it you
tonight, when we three are again together, after such great
changes.  I have told it all.'

His bowed head, and her angel-face and filial duty, derived a more
pathetic meaning from it than they had had before.  If I had wanted
anything by which to mark this night of our re-union, I should have
found it in this.

Agnes rose up from her father's side, before long; and going softly
to her piano, played some of the old airs to which we had often
listened in that place.

'Have you any intention of going away again?' Agnes asked me, as I
was standing by.

'What does my sister say to that?'

'I hope not.'

'Then I have no such intention, Agnes.'

'I think you ought not, Trotwood, since you ask me,' she said,
mildly.  'Your growing reputation and success enlarge your power of
doing good; and if I could spare my brother,' with her eyes upon
me, 'perhaps the time could not.'

'What I am, you have made me, Agnes.  You should know best.'

'I made you, Trotwood?'

'Yes! Agnes, my dear girl!' I said, bending over her.  'I tried to
tell you, when we met today, something that has been in my thoughts
since Dora died.  You remember, when you came down to me in our
little room - pointing upward, Agnes?'

'Oh, Trotwood!' she returned, her eyes filled with tears.  'So
loving, so confiding, and so young! Can I ever forget?'

'As you were then, my sister, I have often thought since, you have
ever been to me.  Ever pointing upward, Agnes; ever leading me to
something better; ever directing me to higher things!'

She only shook her head; through her tears I saw the same sad quiet
smile.

'And I am so grateful to you for it, Agnes, so bound to you, that
there is no name for the affection of my heart.  I want you to
know, yet don't know how to tell you, that all my life long I shall
look up to you, and be guided by you, as I have been through the
darkness that is past.  Whatever betides, whatever new ties you may
form, whatever changes may come between us, I shall always look to
you, and love you, as I do now, and have always done.  You will
always be my solace and resource, as you have always been.  Until
I die, my dearest sister, I shall see you always before me,
pointing upward!'

She put her hand in mine, and told me she was proud of me, and of
what I said; although I praised her very far beyond her worth. 
Then she went on softly playing, but without removing her eyes from
me.
'Do you know, what I have heard tonight, Agnes,' said I, strangely
seems to be a part of the feeling with which I regarded you when I
saw you first - with which I sat beside you in my rough
school-days?'

'You knew I had no mother,' she replied with a smile, 'and felt
kindly towards me.'

'More than that, Agnes, I knew, almost as if I had known this
story, that there was something inexplicably gentle and softened,
surrounding you; something that might have been sorrowful in
someone else (as I can now understand it was), but was not so in
you.'

She softly played on, looking at me still.

'Will you laugh at my cherishing such fancies, Agnes?'

'No!'

'Or at my saying that I really believe I felt, even then, that you
could be faithfully affectionate against all discouragement, and
never cease to be so, until you ceased to live?  - Will you laugh
at such a dream?'

'Oh, no! Oh, no!'

For an instant, a distressful shadow crossed her face; but, even in
the start it gave me, it was gone; and she was playing on, and
looking at me with her own calm smile.

As I rode back in the lonely night, the wind going by me like a
restless memory, I thought of this, and feared she was not happy. 
I was not happy; but, thus far, I had faithfully set the seal upon
the Past, and, thinking of her, pointing upward, thought of her as
pointing to that sky above me, where, in the mystery to come, I
might yet love her with a love unknown on earth, and tell her what
the strife had been within me when I loved her here.

CHAPTER 61
I AM SHOWN TWO INTERESTING PENITENTS

For a time - at all events until my book should be completed, which
would be the work of several months - I took up my abode in my
aunt's house at Dover; and there, sitting in the window from which
I had looked out at the moon upon the sea, when that roof first
gave me shelter, I quietly pursued my task.

In pursuance of my intention of referring to my own fictions only
when their course should incidentally connect itself with the
progress of my story, I do not enter on the aspirations, the
delights, anxieties, and triumphs of my art.  That I truly devoted
myself to it with my strongest earnestness, and bestowed upon it
every energy of my soul, I have already said.  If the books I have
written be of any worth, they will supply the rest.  I shall
otherwise have written to poor purpose, and the rest will be of
interest to no one.

Occasionally, I went to London; to lose myself in the swarm of life
there, or to consult with Traddles on some business point.  He had
managed for me, in my absence, with the soundest judgement; and my
worldly affairs were prospering.  As my notoriety began to bring
upon me an enormous quantity of letters from people of whom I had
no knowledge - chiefly about nothing, and extremely difficult to
answer - I agreed with Traddles to have my name painted up on his
door.  There, the devoted postman on that beat delivered bushels of
letters for me; and there, at intervals, I laboured through them,
like a Home Secretary of State without the salary.

Among this correspondence, there dropped in, every now and then, an
obliging proposal from one of the numerous outsiders always lurking
about the Commons, to practise under cover of my name (if I would
take the necessary steps remaining to make a proctor of myself),
and pay me a percentage on the profits.  But I declined these
offers; being already aware that there were plenty of such covert
practitioners in existence, and considering the Commons quite bad
enough, without my doing anything to make it worse.

The girls had gone home, when my name burst into bloom on
Traddles's door; and the sharp boy looked, all day, as if he had
never heard of Sophy, shut up in a back room, glancing down from
her work into a sooty little strip of garden with a pump in it. 
But there I always found her, the same bright housewife; often
humming her Devonshire ballads when no strange foot was coming up
the stairs, and blunting the sharp boy in his official closet with
melody.

I wondered, at first, why I so often found Sophy writing in a
copy-book; and why she always shut it up when I appeared, and
hurried it into the table-drawer.  But the secret soon came out. 
One day, Traddles (who had just come home through the drizzling
sleet from Court) took a paper out of his desk, and asked me what
I thought of that handwriting?

'Oh, DON'T, Tom!' cried Sophy, who was warming his slippers before
the fire.

'My dear,' returned Tom, in a delighted state, 'why not?  What do
you say to that writing, Copperfield?'

'It's extraordinarily legal and formal,' said I.  'I don't think I
ever saw such a stiff hand.'

'Not like a lady's hand, is it?' said Traddles.

'A lady's!' I repeated.  'Bricks and mortar are more like a lady's
hand!'

Traddles broke into a rapturous laugh, and informed me that it was
Sophy's writing; that Sophy had vowed and declared he would need a
copying-clerk soon, and she would be that clerk; that she had
acquired this hand from a pattern; and that she could throw off -
I forget how many folios an hour.  Sophy was very much confused by
my being told all this, and said that when 'Tom' was made a judge
he wouldn't be so ready to proclaim it.  Which 'Tom' denied;
averring that he should always be equally proud of it, under all
circumstances.

'What a thoroughly good and charming wife she is, my dear
Traddles!' said I, when she had gone away, laughing.

'My dear Copperfield,' returned Traddles, 'she is, without any
exception, the dearest girl! The way she manages this place; her
punctuality, domestic knowledge, economy, and order; her
cheerfulness, Copperfield!'

'Indeed, you have reason to commend her!' I returned.  'You are a
happy fellow.  I believe you make yourselves, and each other, two
of the happiest people in the world.'

'I am sure we ARE two of the happiest people,' returned Traddles. 
'I admit that, at all events.  Bless my soul, when I see her
getting up by candle-light on these dark mornings, busying herself
in the day's arrangements, going out to market before the clerks
come into the Inn, caring for no weather, devising the most capital
little dinners out of the plainest materials, making puddings and
pies, keeping everything in its right place, always so neat and
ornamental herself, sitting up at night with me if it's ever so
late, sweet-tempered and encouraging always, and all for me, I
positively sometimes can't believe it, Copperfield!'

He was tender of the very slippers she had been warming, as he put
them on, and stretched his feet enjoyingly upon the fender.

'I positively sometimes can't believe it,' said Traddles.  'Then
our pleasures! Dear me, they are inexpensive, but they are quite
wonderful! When we are at home here, of an evening, and shut the
outer door, and draw those curtains - which she made - where could
we be more snug?  When it's fine, and we go out for a walk in the
evening, the streets abound in enjoyment for us.  We look into the
glittering windows of the jewellers' shops; and I show Sophy which
of the diamond-eyed serpents, coiled up on white satin rising
grounds, I would give her if I could afford it; and Sophy shows me
which of the gold watches that are capped and jewelled and
engine-turned, and possessed of the horizontal lever-
escape-movement, and all sorts of things, she would buy for me if
she could afford it; and we pick out the spoons and forks,
fish-slices, butter-knives, and sugar-tongs, we should both prefer
if we could both afford it; and really we go away as if we had got
them! Then, when we stroll into the squares, and great streets, and
see a house to let, sometimes we look up at it, and say, how would
THAT do, if I was made a judge?  And we parcel it out - such a room
for us, such rooms for the girls, and so forth; until we settle to
our satisfaction that it would do, or it wouldn't do, as the case
may be.  Sometimes, we go at half-price to the pit of the theatre
- the very smell of which is cheap, in my opinion, at the money -
and there we thoroughly enjoy the play: which Sophy believes every
word of, and so do I.  In walking home, perhaps we buy a little bit
of something at a cook's-shop, or a little lobster at the
fishmongers, and bring it here, and make a splendid supper,
chatting about what we have seen.  Now, you know, Copperfield, if
I was Lord Chancellor, we couldn't do this!'

'You would do something, whatever you were, my dear Traddles,'
thought I, 'that would be pleasant and amiable.  And by the way,'
I said aloud, 'I suppose you never draw any skeletons now?'

'Really,' replied Traddles, laughing, and reddening, 'I can't
wholly deny that I do, my dear Copperfield.  For being in one of
the back rows of the King's Bench the other day, with a pen in my
hand, the fancy came into my head to try how I had preserved that
accomplishment.  And I am afraid there's a skeleton - in a wig - on
the ledge of the desk.'

After we had both laughed heartily, Traddles wound up by looking
with a smile at the fire, and saying, in his forgiving way, 'Old
Creakle!'

'I have a letter from that old - Rascal here,' said I.  For I never
was less disposed to forgive him the way he used to batter
Traddles, than when I saw Traddles so ready to forgive him himself.

'From Creakle the schoolmaster?' exclaimed Traddles.  'No!'

'Among the persons who are attracted to me in my rising fame and
fortune,' said I, looking over my letters, 'and who discover that
they were always much attached to me, is the self-same Creakle.  He
is not a schoolmaster now, Traddles.  He is retired.  He is a
Middlesex Magistrate.'

I thought Traddles might be surprised to hear it, but he was not so
at all.

'How do you suppose he comes to be a Middlesex Magistrate?' said I.

'Oh dear me!' replied Traddles, 'it would be very difficult to
answer that question.  Perhaps he voted for somebody, or lent money
to somebody, or bought something of somebody, or otherwise obliged
somebody, or jobbed for somebody, who knew somebody who got the
lieutenant of the county to nominate him for the commission.'

'On the commission he is, at any rate,' said I.  'And he writes to
me here, that he will be glad to show me, in operation, the only
true system of prison discipline; the only unchallengeable way of
making sincere and lasting converts and penitents - which, you
know, is by solitary confinement.  What do you say?'

'To the system?' inquired Traddles, looking grave.

'No.  To my accepting the offer, and your going with me?'

'I don't object,' said Traddles.

'Then I'll write to say so.  You remember (to say nothing of our
treatment) this same Creakle turning his son out of doors, I
suppose, and the life he used to lead his wife and daughter?'

'Perfectly,' said Traddles.

'Yet, if you'll read his letter, you'll find he is the tenderest of
men to prisoners convicted of the whole calendar of felonies,' said
I; 'though I can't find that his tenderness extends to any other
class of created beings.'

Traddles shrugged his shoulders, and was not at all surprised.  I
had not expected him to be, and was not surprised myself; or my
observation of similar practical satires would have been but
scanty.  We arranged the time of our visit, and I wrote accordingly
to Mr. Creakle that evening.

On the appointed day - I think it was the next day, but no matter
- Traddles and I repaired to the prison where Mr. Creakle was
powerful.  It was an immense and solid building, erected at a vast
expense.  I could not help thinking, as we approached the gate,
what an uproar would have been made in the country, if any deluded
man had proposed to spend one half the money it had cost, on the
erection of an industrial school for the young, or a house of
refuge for the deserving old.

In an office that might have been on the ground-floor of the Tower
of Babel, it was so massively constructed, we were presented to our
old schoolmaster; who was one of a group, composed of two or three
of the busier sort of magistrates, and some visitors they had
brought.  He received me, like a man who had formed my mind in
bygone years, and had always loved me tenderly.  On my introducing
Traddles, Mr. Creakle expressed, in like manner, but in an inferior
degree, that he had always been Traddles's guide, philosopher, and
friend.  Our venerable instructor was a great deal older, and not
improved in appearance.  His face was as fiery as ever; his eyes
were as small, and rather deeper set.  The scanty, wet-looking grey
hair, by which I remembered him, was almost gone; and the thick
veins in his bald head were none the more agreeable to look at.

After some conversation among these gentlemen, from which I might
have supposed that there was nothing in the world to be
legitimately taken into account but the supreme comfort of
prisoners, at any expense, and nothing on the wide earth to be done
outside prison-doors, we began our inspection.  It being then just
dinner-time, we went, first into the great kitchen, where every
prisoner's dinner was in course of being set out separately (to be
handed to him in his cell), with the regularity and precision of
clock-work.  I said aside, to Traddles, that I wondered whether it
occurred to anybody, that there was a striking contrast between
these plentiful repasts of choice quality, and the dinners, not to
say of paupers, but of soldiers, sailors, labourers, the great bulk
of the honest, working community; of whom not one man in five
hundred ever dined half so well.  But I learned that the 'system'
required high living; and, in short, to dispose of the system, once
for all, I found that on that head and on all others, 'the system'
put an end to all doubts, and disposed of all anomalies.  Nobody
appeared to have the least idea that there was any other system,
but THE system, to be considered.

As we were going through some of the magnificent passages, I
inquired of Mr. Creakle and his friends what were supposed to be
the main advantages of this all-governing and universally
over-riding system?  I found them to be the perfect isolation of
prisoners - so that no one man in confinement there, knew anything
about another; and the reduction of prisoners to a wholesome state
of mind, leading to sincere contrition and repentance.

Now, it struck me, when we began to visit individuals in their
cells, and to traverse the passages in which those cells were, and
to have the manner of the going to chapel and so forth, explained
to us, that there was a strong probability of the prisoners knowing
a good deal about each other, and of their carrying on a pretty
complete system of intercourse.  This, at the time I write, has
been proved, I believe, to be the case; but, as it would have been
flat blasphemy against the system to have hinted such a doubt then,
I looked out for the penitence as diligently as I could.

And here again, I had great misgivings.  I found as prevalent a
fashion in the form of the penitence, as I had left outside in the
forms of the coats and waistcoats in the windows of the tailors'
shops.  I found a vast amount of profession, varying very little in
character: varying very little (which I thought exceedingly
suspicious), even in words.  I found a great many foxes,
disparaging whole vineyards of inaccessible grapes; but I found
very few foxes whom I would have trusted within reach of a bunch. 
Above all, I found that the most professing men were the greatest
objects of interest; and that their conceit, their vanity, their
want of excitement, and their love of deception (which many of them
possessed to an almost incredible extent, as their histories
showed), all prompted to these professions, and were all gratified
by them.

However, I heard so repeatedly, in the course of our goings to and
fro, of a certain Number Twenty Seven, who was the Favourite, and
who really appeared to be a Model Prisoner, that I resolved to
suspend my judgement until I should see Twenty Seven.  Twenty
Eight, I understood, was also a bright particular star; but it was
his misfortune to have his glory a little dimmed by the
extraordinary lustre of Twenty Seven.  I heard so much of Twenty
Seven, of his pious admonitions to everybody around him, and of the
beautiful letters he constantly wrote to his mother (whom he seemed
to consider in a very bad way), that I became quite impatient to
see him.

I had to restrain my impatience for some time, on account of Twenty
Seven being reserved for a concluding effect.  But, at last, we
came to the door of his cell; and Mr. Creakle, looking through a
little hole in it, reported to us, in a state of the greatest
admiration, that he was reading a Hymn Book.

There was such a rush of heads immediately, to see Number Twenty
Seven reading his Hymn Book, that the little hole was blocked up,
six or seven heads deep.  To remedy this inconvenience, and give us
an opportunity of conversing with Twenty Seven in all his purity,
Mr. Creakle directed the door of the cell to be unlocked, and
Twenty Seven to be invited out into the passage.  This was done;
and whom should Traddles and I then behold, to our amazement, in
this converted Number Twenty Seven, but Uriah Heep!

He knew us directly; and said, as he came out - with the old
writhe, -

'How do you do, Mr. Copperfield?  How do you do, Mr. Traddles?'

This recognition caused a general admiration in the party.  I
rather thought that everyone was struck by his not being proud, and
taking notice of us.

'Well, Twenty Seven,' said Mr. Creakle, mournfully admiring him. 
'How do you find yourself today?'

'I am very umble, sir!' replied Uriah Heep.

'You are always so, Twenty Seven,' said Mr. Creakle.

Here, another gentleman asked, with extreme anxiety: 'Are you quite
comfortable?'

'Yes, I thank you, sir!' said Uriah Heep, looking in that
direction.  'Far more comfortable here, than ever I was outside. 
I see my follies, now, sir.  That's what makes me comfortable.'

Several gentlemen were much affected; and a third questioner,
forcing himself to the front, inquired with extreme feeling: 'How
do you find the beef?'

'Thank you, sir,' replied Uriah, glancing in the new direction of
this voice, 'it was tougher yesterday than I could wish; but it's
my duty to bear.  I have committed follies, gentlemen,' said Uriah,
looking round with a meek smile, 'and I ought to bear the
consequences without repining.'
A murmur, partly of gratification at Twenty Seven's celestial state
of mind, and partly of indignation against the Contractor who had
given him any cause of complaint (a note of which was immediately
made by Mr. Creakle), having subsided, Twenty Seven stood in the
midst of us, as if he felt himself the principal object of merit in
a highly meritorious museum.  That we, the neophytes, might have an
excess of light shining upon us all at once, orders were given to
let out Twenty Eight.

I had been so much astonished already, that I only felt a kind of
resigned wonder when Mr. Littimer walked forth, reading a good
book!

'Twenty Eight,' said a gentleman in spectacles, who had not yet
spoken, 'you complained last week, my good fellow, of the cocoa. 
How has it been since?'

'I thank you, sir,' said Mr. Littimer, 'it has been better made. 
If I might take the liberty of saying so, sir, I don't think the
milk which is boiled with it is quite genuine; but I am aware, sir,
that there is a great adulteration of milk, in London, and that the
article in a pure state is difficult to be obtained.'

It appeared to me that the gentleman in spectacles backed his
Twenty Eight against Mr. Creakle's Twenty Seven, for each of them
took his own man in hand.

'What is your state of mind, Twenty Eight?' said the questioner in
spectacles.

'I thank you, sir,' returned Mr. Littimer; 'I see my follies now,
sir.  I am a good deal troubled when I think of the sins of my
former companions, sir; but I trust they may find forgiveness.'

'You are quite happy yourself?' said the questioner, nodding
encouragement.

'I am much obliged to you, sir,' returned Mr. Littimer.  'Perfectly
so.'

'Is there anything at all on your mind now?' said the questioner. 
'If so, mention it, Twenty Eight.'

'Sir,' said Mr. Littimer, without looking up, 'if my eyes have not
deceived me, there is a gentleman present who was acquainted with
me in my former life.  It may be profitable to that gentleman to
know, sir, that I attribute my past follies, entirely to having
lived a thoughtless life in the service of young men; and to having
allowed myself to be led by them into weaknesses, which I had not
the strength to resist.  I hope that gentleman will take warning,
sir, and will not be offended at my freedom.  It is for his good. 
I am conscious of my own past follies.  I hope he may repent of all
the wickedness and sin to which he has been a party.'

I observed that several gentlemen were shading their eyes, each
with one hand, as if they had just come into church.

'This does you credit, Twenty Eight,' returned the questioner.  'I
should have expected it of you.  Is there anything else?'

'Sir,' returned Mr. Littimer, slightly lifting up his eyebrows, but
not his eyes, 'there was a young woman who fell into dissolute
courses, that I endeavoured to save, sir, but could not rescue.  I
beg that gentleman, if he has it in his power, to inform that young
woman from me that I forgive her her bad conduct towards myself,
and that I call her to repentance - if he will be so good.'

'I have no doubt, Twenty Eight,' returned the questioner, 'that the
gentleman you refer to feels very strongly - as we all must - what
you have so properly said.  We will not detain you.'

'I thank you, sir,' said Mr. Littimer.  'Gentlemen, I wish you a
good day, and hoping you and your families will also see your
wickedness, and amend!'

With this, Number Twenty Eight retired, after a glance between him
and Uriah; as if they were not altogether unknown to each other,
through some medium of communication; and a murmur went round the
group, as his door shut upon him, that he was a most respectable
man, and a beautiful case.

'Now, Twenty Seven,' said Mr. Creakle, entering on a clear stage
with his man, 'is there anything that anyone can do for you?  If
so, mention it.'

'I would umbly ask, sir,' returned Uriah, with a jerk of his
malevolent head, 'for leave to write again to mother.'

'It shall certainly be granted,' said Mr. Creakle.

'Thank you, sir! I am anxious about mother.  I am afraid she ain't
safe.'

Somebody incautiously asked, what from?  But there was a
scandalized whisper of 'Hush!'

'Immortally safe, sir,' returned Uriah, writhing in the direction
of the voice.  'I should wish mother to be got into my state.  I
never should have been got into my present state if I hadn't come
here.  I wish mother had come here.  It would be better for
everybody, if they got took up, and was brought here.'

This sentiment gave unbounded satisfaction - greater satisfaction,
I think, than anything that had passed yet.

'Before I come here,' said Uriah, stealing a look at us, as if he
would have blighted the outer world to which we belonged, if he
could, 'I was given to follies; but now I am sensible of my
follies.  There's a deal of sin outside.  There's a deal of sin in
mother.  There's nothing but sin everywhere - except here.'

'You are quite changed?' said Mr. Creakle.

'Oh dear, yes, sir!' cried this hopeful penitent.

'You wouldn't relapse, if you were going out?' asked somebody else.

'Oh de-ar no, sir!'

'Well!' said Mr. Creakle, 'this is very gratifying.  You have
addressed Mr. Copperfield, Twenty Seven.  Do you wish to say
anything further to him?'

'You knew me, a long time before I came here and was changed, Mr.
Copperfield,' said Uriah, looking at me; and a more villainous look
I never saw, even on his visage.  'You knew me when, in spite of my
follies, I was umble among them that was proud, and meek among them
that was violent - you was violent to me yourself, Mr. Copperfield. 
Once, you struck me a blow in the face, you know.'

General commiseration.  Several indignant glances directed at me.

'But I forgive you, Mr. Copperfield,' said Uriah, making his
forgiving nature the subject of a most impious and awful parallel,
which I shall not record.  'I forgive everybody.  It would ill
become me to bear malice.  I freely forgive you, and I hope you'll
curb your passions in future.  I hope Mr. W. will repent, and Miss
W., and all of that sinful lot.  You've been visited with
affliction, and I hope it may do you good; but you'd better have
come here.  Mr. W. had better have come here, and Miss W. too.  The
best wish I could give you, Mr. Copperfield, and give all of you
gentlemen, is, that you could be took up and brought here.  When I
think of my past follies, and my present state, I am sure it would
be best for you.  I pity all who ain't brought here!'

He sneaked back into his cell, amidst a little chorus of
approbation; and both Traddles and I experienced a great relief
when he was locked in.

It was a characteristic feature in this repentance, that I was fain
to ask what these two men had done, to be there at all.  That
appeared to be the last thing about which they had anything to say. 
I addressed myself to one of the two warders, who, I suspected from
certain latent indications in their faces, knew pretty well what
all this stir was worth.

'Do you know,' said I, as we walked along the passage, 'what felony
was Number Twenty Seven's last "folly"?'

The answer was that it was a Bank case.

'A fraud on the Bank of England?' I asked.
'Yes, sir.  Fraud, forgery, and conspiracy.  He and some others. 
He set the others on.  It was a deep plot for a large sum. 
Sentence, transportation for life.  Twenty Seven was the knowingest
bird of the lot, and had very nearly kept himself safe; but not
quite.  The Bank was just able to put salt upon his tail - and only
just.'

'Do you know Twenty Eight's offence?'

'Twenty Eight,' returned my informant, speaking throughout in a low
tone, and looking over his shoulder as we walked along the passage,
to guard himself from being overheard, in such an unlawful
reference to these Immaculates, by Creakle and the rest; 'Twenty
Eight (also transportation) got a place, and robbed a young master
of a matter of two hundred and fifty pounds in money and valuables,
the night before they were going abroad.  I particularly recollect
his case, from his being took by a dwarf.'

'A what?'

'A little woman.  I have forgot her name?'

'Not Mowcher?'

'That's it! He had eluded pursuit, and was going to America in a
flaxen wig, and whiskers, and such a complete disguise as never you
see in all your born days; when the little woman, being in
Southampton, met him walking along the street - picked him out with
her sharp eye in a moment - ran betwixt his legs to upset him - and
held on to him like grim Death.'

'Excellent Miss Mowcher!' cried I.

'You'd have said so, if you had seen her, standing on a chair in
the witness-box at the trial, as I did,' said my friend.  'He cut
her face right open, and pounded her in the most brutal manner,
when she took him; but she never loosed her hold till he was locked
up.  She held so tight to him, in fact, that the officers were
obliged to take 'em both together.  She gave her evidence in the
gamest way, and was highly complimented by the Bench, and cheered
right home to her lodgings.  She said in Court that she'd have took
him single-handed (on account of what she knew concerning him), if
he had been Samson.  And it's my belief she would!'

It was mine too, and I highly respected Miss Mowcher for it.

We had now seen all there was to see.  It would have been in vain
to represent to such a man as the Worshipful Mr. Creakle, that
Twenty Seven and Twenty Eight were perfectly consistent and
unchanged; that exactly what they were then, they had always been;
that the hypocritical knaves were just the subjects to make that
sort of profession in such a place; that they knew its market-value
at least as well as we did, in the immediate service it would do
them when they were expatriated; in a word, that it was a rotten,
hollow, painfully suggestive piece of business altogether.  We left
them to their system and themselves, and went home wondering.

'Perhaps it's a good thing, Traddles,' said I, 'to have an unsound
Hobby ridden hard; for it's the sooner ridden to death.'

'I hope so,' replied Traddles.

CHAPTER 62
A LIGHT SHINES ON MY WAY

The year came round to Christmas-time, and I had been at home above
two months.  I had seen Agnes frequently.  However loud the general
voice might be in giving me encouragement, and however fervent the
emotions and endeavours to which it roused me, I heard her lightest
word of praise as I heard nothing else.

At least once a week, and sometimes oftener, I rode over there, and
passed the evening.  I usually rode back at night; for the old
unhappy sense was always hovering about me now - most sorrowfully
when I left her - and I was glad to be up and out, rather than
wandering over the past in weary wakefulness or miserable dreams. 
I wore away the longest part of many wild sad nights, in those
rides; reviving, as I went, the thoughts that had occupied me in my
long absence.

Or, if I were to say rather that I listened to the echoes of those
thoughts, I should better express the truth.  They spoke to me from
afar off.  I had put them at a distance, and accepted my inevitable
place.  When I read to Agnes what I wrote; when I saw her listening
face; moved her to smiles or tears; and heard her cordial voice so
earnest on the shadowy events of that imaginative world in which I
lived; I thought what a fate mine might have been - but only
thought so, as I had thought after I was married to Dora, what I
could have wished my wife to be.

My duty to Agnes, who loved me with a love, which, if I disquieted,
I wronged most selfishly and poorly, and could never restore; my
matured assurance that I, who had worked out my own destiny, and
won what I had impetuously set my heart on, had no right to murmur,
and must bear; comprised what I felt and what I had learned.  But
I loved her: and now it even became some consolation to me, vaguely
to conceive a distant day when I might blamelessly avow it; when
all this should be over; when I could say 'Agnes, so it was when I
came home; and now I am old, and I never have loved since!'

She did not once show me any change in herself.  What she always
had been to me, she still was; wholly unaltered.

Between my aunt and me there had been something, in this connexion,
since the night of my return, which I cannot call a restraint, or
an avoidance of the subject, so much as an implied understanding
that we thought of it together, but did not shape our thoughts into
words.  When, according to our old custom, we sat before the fire
at night, we often fell into this train; as naturally, and as
consciously to each other, as if we had unreservedly said so.  But
we preserved an unbroken silence.  I believed that she had read, or
partly read, my thoughts that night; and that she fully
comprehended why I gave mine no more distinct expression.

This Christmas-time being come, and Agnes having reposed no new
confidence in me, a doubt that had several times arisen in my mind
- whether she could have that perception of the true state of my
breast, which restrained her with the apprehension of giving me
pain - began to oppress me heavily.  If that were so, my sacrifice
was nothing; my plainest obligation to her unfulfilled; and every
poor action I had shrunk from, I was hourly doing.  I resolved to
set this right beyond all doubt; - if such a barrier were between
us, to break it down at once with a determined hand.

It was - what lasting reason have I to remember it! - a cold,
harsh, winter day.  There had been snow, some hours before; and it
lay, not deep, but hard-frozen on the ground.  Out at sea, beyond
my window, the wind blew ruggedly from the north.  I had been
thinking of it, sweeping over those mountain wastes of snow in
Switzerland, then inaccessible to any human foot; and had been
speculating which was the lonelier, those solitary regions, or a
deserted ocean.

'Riding today, Trot?' said my aunt, putting her head in at the
door.

'Yes,' said I, 'I am going over to Canterbury.  It's a good day for
a ride.'

'I hope your horse may think so too,' said my aunt; 'but at present
he is holding down his head and his ears, standing before the door
there, as if he thought his stable preferable.'

My aunt, I may observe, allowed my horse on the forbidden ground,
but had not at all relented towards the donkeys.

'He will be fresh enough, presently!' said I.

'The ride will do his master good, at all events,' observed my
aunt, glancing at the papers on my table.  'Ah, child, you pass a
good many hours here! I never thought, when I used to read books,
what work it was to write them.'

'It's work enough to read them, sometimes,' I returned.  'As to the
writing, it has its own charms, aunt.'

'Ah! I see!' said my aunt.  'Ambition, love of approbation,
sympathy, and much more, I suppose?  Well: go along with you!'

'Do you know anything more,' said I, standing composedly before her
- she had patted me on the shoulder, and sat down in my chair - 'of
that attachment of Agnes?'

She looked up in my face a little while, before replying:

'I think I do, Trot.'

'Are you confirmed in your impression?' I inquired.

'I think I am, Trot.'

She looked so steadfastly at me: with a kind of doubt, or pity, or
suspense in her affection: that I summoned the stronger
determination to show her a perfectly cheerful face.

'And what is more, Trot -' said my aunt.

'Yes!'

'I think Agnes is going to be married.'

'God bless her!' said I, cheerfully.

'God bless her!' said my aunt, 'and her husband too!'

I echoed it, parted from my aunt, and went lightly downstairs,
mounted, and rode away.  There was greater reason than before to do
what I had resolved to do.

How well I recollect the wintry ride! The frozen particles of ice,
brushed from the blades of grass by the wind, and borne across my
face; the hard clatter of the horse's hoofs, beating a tune upon
the ground; the stiff-tilled soil; the snowdrift, lightly eddying
in the chalk-pit as the breeze ruffled it; the smoking team with
the waggon of old hay, stopping to breathe on the hill-top, and
shaking their bells musically; the whitened slopes and sweeps of
Down-land lying against the dark sky, as if they were drawn on a
huge slate!

I found Agnes alone.  The little girls had gone to their own homes
now, and she was alone by the fire, reading.  She put down her book
on seeing me come in; and having welcomed me as usual, took her
work-basket and sat in one of the old-fashioned windows.

I sat beside her on the window-seat, and we talked of what I was
doing, and when it would be done, and of the progress I had made
since my last visit.  Agnes was very cheerful; and laughingly
predicted that I should soon become too famous to be talked to, on
such subjects.

'So I make the most of the present time, you see,' said Agnes, 'and
talk to you while I may.'

As I looked at her beautiful face, observant of her work, she
raised her mild clear eyes, and saw that I was looking at her.

'You are thoughtful today, Trotwood!'

'Agnes, shall I tell you what about?  I came to tell you.'

She put aside her work, as she was used to do when we were
seriously discussing anything; and gave me her whole attention.

'My dear Agnes, do you doubt my being true to you?'

'No!' she answered, with a look of astonishment.

'Do you doubt my being what I always have been to you?'

'No!' she answered, as before.

'Do you remember that I tried to tell you, when I came home, what
a debt of gratitude I owed you, dearest Agnes, and how fervently I
felt towards you?'

'I remember it,' she said, gently, 'very well.'

'You have a secret,' said I.  'Let me share it, Agnes.'

She cast down her eyes, and trembled.

'I could hardly fail to know, even if I had not heard - but from
other lips than yours, Agnes, which seems strange - that there is
someone upon whom you have bestowed the treasure of your love.  Do
not shut me out of what concerns your happiness so nearly! If you
can trust me, as you say you can, and as I know you may, let me be
your friend, your brother, in this matter, of all others!'

With an appealing, almost a reproachful, glance, she rose from the
window; and hurrying across the room as if without knowing where,
put her hands before her face, and burst into such tears as smote
me to the heart.

And yet they awakened something in me, bringing promise to my
heart.  Without my knowing why, these tears allied themselves with
the quietly sad smile which was so fixed in my remembrance, and
shook me more with hope than fear or sorrow.

'Agnes! Sister! Dearest! What have I done?'

'Let me go away, Trotwood.  I am not well.  I am not myself.  I
will speak to you by and by - another time.  I will write to you. 
Don't speak to me now.  Don't! don't!'

I sought to recollect what she had said, when I had spoken to her
on that former night, of her affection needing no return.  It
seemed a very world that I must search through in a moment.
'Agnes, I cannot bear to see you so, and think that I have been the
cause.  My dearest girl, dearer to me than anything in life, if you
are unhappy, let me share your unhappiness.  If you are in need of
help or counsel, let me try to give it to you.  If you have indeed
a burden on your heart, let me try to lighten it.  For whom do I
live now, Agnes, if it is not for you!'

'Oh, spare me! I am not myself! Another time!' was all I could
distinguish.

Was it a selfish error that was leading me away?  Or, having once
a clue to hope, was there something opening to me that I had not
dared to think of?

'I must say more.  I cannot let you leave me so! For Heaven's sake,
Agnes, let us not mistake each other after all these years, and all
that has come and gone with them! I must speak plainly.  If you
have any lingering thought that I could envy the happiness you will
confer; that I could not resign you to a dearer protector, of your
own choosing; that I could not, from my removed place, be a
contented witness of your joy; dismiss it, for I don't deserve it!
I have not suffered quite in vain.  You have not taught me quite in
vain.  There is no alloy of self in what I feel for you.'

She was quiet now.  In a little time, she turned her pale face
towards me, and said in a low voice, broken here and there, but
very clear:

'I owe it to your pure friendship for me, Trotwood - which, indeed,
I do not doubt - to tell you, you are mistaken.  I can do no more. 
If I have sometimes, in the course of years, wanted help and
counsel, they have come to me.  If I have sometimes been unhappy,
the feeling has passed away.  If I have ever had a burden on my
heart, it has been lightened for me.  If I have any secret, it is
- no new one; and is - not what you suppose.  I cannot reveal it,
or divide it.  It has long been mine, and must remain mine.'

'Agnes! Stay! A moment!'

She was going away, but I detained her.  I clasped my arm about her
waist.  'In the course of years!' 'It is not a new one!' New
thoughts and hopes were whirling through my mind, and all the
colours of my life were changing.

'Dearest Agnes! Whom I so respect and honour - whom I so devotedly
love! When I came here today, I thought that nothing could have
wrested this confession from me.  I thought I could have kept it in
my bosom all our lives, till we were old.  But, Agnes, if I have
indeed any new-born hope that I may ever call you something more
than Sister, widely different from Sister! -'

Her tears fell fast; but they were not like those she had lately
shed, and I saw my hope brighten in them.

'Agnes! Ever my guide, and best support! If you had been more
mindful of yourself, and less of me, when we grew up here together,
I think my heedless fancy never would have wandered from you.  But
you were so much better than I, so necessary to me in every boyish
hope and disappointment, that to have you to confide in, and rely
upon in everything, became a second nature, supplanting for the
time the first and greater one of loving you as I do!'

Still weeping, but not sadly - joyfully! And clasped in my arms as
she had never been, as I had thought she never was to be!

'When I loved Dora - fondly, Agnes, as you know -'

'Yes!' she cried, earnestly.  'I am glad to know it!'

'When I loved her - even then, my love would have been incomplete,
without your sympathy.  I had it, and it was perfected.  And when
I lost her, Agnes, what should I have been without you, still!'

Closer in my arms, nearer to my heart, her trembling hand upon my
shoulder, her sweet eyes shining through her tears, on mine!

'I went away, dear Agnes, loving you.  I stayed away, loving you. 
I returned home, loving you!'

And now, I tried to tell her of the struggle I had had, and the
conclusion I had come to.  I tried to lay my mind before her,
truly, and entirely.  I tried to show her how I had hoped I had
come into the better knowledge of myself and of her; how I had
resigned myself to what that better knowledge brought; and how I
had come there, even that day, in my fidelity to this.  If she did
so love me (I said) that she could take me for her husband, she
could do so, on no deserving of mine, except upon the truth of my
love for her, and the trouble in which it had ripened to be what it
was; and hence it was that I revealed it.  And O, Agnes, even out
of thy true eyes, in that same time, the spirit of my child-wife
looked upon me, saying it was well; and winning me, through thee,
to tenderest recollections of the Blossom that had withered in its
bloom!

'I am so blest, Trotwood - my heart is so overcharged - but there
is one thing I must say.'

'Dearest, what?'

She laid her gentle hands upon my shoulders, and looked calmly in
my face.

'Do you know, yet, what it is?'

'I am afraid to speculate on what it is.  Tell me, my dear.'

'I have loved you all my life!'

O, we were happy, we were happy! Our tears were not for the trials
(hers so much the greater) through which we had come to be thus,
but for the rapture of being thus, never to be divided more!

We walked, that winter evening, in the fields together; and the
blessed calm within us seemed to be partaken by the frosty air. 
The early stars began to shine while we were lingering on, and
looking up to them, we thanked our GOD for having guided us to this
tranquillity.

We stood together in the same old-fashioned window at night, when
the moon was shining; Agnes with her quiet eyes raised up to it; I
following her glance.  Long miles of road then opened out before my
mind; and, toiling on, I saw a ragged way-worn boy, forsaken and
neglected, who should come to call even the heart now beating
against mine, his own.

It was nearly dinner-time next day when we appeared before my aunt. 
She was up in my study, Peggotty said: which it was her pride to
keep in readiness and order for me.  We found her, in her
spectacles, sitting by the fire.

'Goodness me!' said my aunt, peering through the dusk, 'who's this
you're bringing home?'

'Agnes,' said I.

As we had arranged to say nothing at first, my aunt was not a
little discomfited.  She darted a hopeful glance at me, when I said
'Agnes'; but seeing that I looked as usual, she took off her
spectacles in despair, and rubbed her nose with them.

She greeted Agnes heartily, nevertheless; and we were soon in the
lighted parlour downstairs, at dinner.  My aunt put on her
spectacles twice or thrice, to take another look at me, but as
often took them off again, disappointed, and rubbed her nose with
them.  Much to the discomfiture of Mr. Dick, who knew this to be a
bad symptom.

'By the by, aunt,' said I, after dinner; 'I have been speaking to
Agnes about what you told me.'

'Then, Trot,' said my aunt, turning scarlet, 'you did wrong, and
broke your promise.'

'You are not angry, aunt, I trust?  I am sure you won't be, when
you learn that Agnes is not unhappy in any attachment.'

'Stuff and nonsense!' said my aunt.

As my aunt appeared to be annoyed, I thought the best way was to
cut her annoyance short.  I took Agnes in my arm to the back of her
chair, and we both leaned over her.  My aunt, with one clap of her
hands, and one look through her spectacles, immediately went into
hysterics, for the first and only time in all my knowledge of her.

The hysterics called up Peggotty.  The moment my aunt was restored,
she flew at Peggotty, and calling her a silly old creature, hugged
her with all her might.  After that, she hugged Mr. Dick (who was
highly honoured, but a good deal surprised); and after that, told
them why.  Then, we were all happy together.

I could not discover whether my aunt, in her last short
conversation with me, had fallen on a pious fraud, or had really
mistaken the state of my mind.  It was quite enough, she said, that
she had told me Agnes was going to be married; and that I now knew
better than anyone how true it was.

We were married within a fortnight.  Traddles and Sophy, and Doctor
and Mrs. Strong, were the only guests at our quiet wedding.  We
left them full of joy; and drove away together.  Clasped in my
embrace, I held the source of every worthy aspiration I had ever
had; the centre of myself, the circle of my life, my own, my wife;
my love of whom was founded on a rock!

'Dearest husband!' said Agnes.  'Now that I may call you by that
name, I have one thing more to tell you.'

'Let me hear it, love.'

'It grows out of the night when Dora died.  She sent you for me.'

'She did.'

'She told me that she left me something.  Can you think what it
was?'

I believed I could.  I drew the wife who had so long loved me,
closer to my side.

'She told me that she made a last request to me, and left me a last
charge.'

'And it was -'

'That only I would occupy this vacant place.'

And Agnes laid her head upon my breast, and wept; and I wept with
her, though we were so happy.

CHAPTER 63
A VISITOR

What I have purposed to record is nearly finished; but there is yet
an incident conspicuous in my memory, on which it often rests with
delight, and without which one thread in the web I have spun would
have a ravelled end.

I had advanced in fame and fortune, my domestic joy was perfect, I
had been married ten happy years.  Agnes and I were sitting by the
fire, in our house in London, one night in spring, and three of our
children were playing in the room, when I was told that a stranger
wished to see me.

He had been asked if he came on business, and had answered No; he
had come for the pleasure of seeing me, and had come a long way. 
He was an old man, my servant said, and looked like a farmer.

As this sounded mysterious to the children, and moreover was like
the beginning of a favourite story Agnes used to tell them,
introductory to the arrival of a wicked old Fairy in a cloak who
hated everybody, it produced some commotion.  One of our boys laid
his head in his mother's lap to be out of harm's way, and little
Agnes (our eldest child) left her doll in a chair to represent her,
and thrust out her little heap of golden curls from between the
window-curtains, to see what happened next.

'Let him come in here!' said I.

There soon appeared, pausing in the dark doorway as he entered, a
hale, grey-haired old man.  Little Agnes, attracted by his looks,
had run to bring him in, and I had not yet clearly seen his face,
when my wife, starting up, cried out to me, in a pleased and
agitated voice, that it was Mr. Peggotty!

It WAS Mr. Peggotty.  An old man now, but in a ruddy, hearty,
strong old age.  When our first emotion was over, and he sat before
the fire with the children on his knees, and the blaze shining on
his face, he looked, to me, as vigorous and robust, withal as
handsome, an old man, as ever I had seen.

'Mas'r Davy,' said he.  And the old name in the old tone fell so
naturally on my ear! 'Mas'r Davy, 'tis a joyful hour as I see you,
once more, 'long with your own trew wife!'

'A joyful hour indeed, old friend!' cried I.

'And these heer pretty ones,' said Mr. Peggotty.  'To look at these
heer flowers! Why, Mas'r Davy, you was but the heighth of the
littlest of these, when I first see you! When Em'ly warn't no
bigger, and our poor lad were BUT a lad!'

'Time has changed me more than it has changed you since then,' said
I.  'But let these dear rogues go to bed; and as no house in
England but this must hold you, tell me where to send for your
luggage (is the old black bag among it, that went so far, I
wonder!), and then, over a glass of Yarmouth grog, we will have the
tidings of ten years!'

'Are you alone?' asked Agnes.

'Yes, ma'am,' he said, kissing her hand, 'quite alone.'

We sat him between us, not knowing how to give him welcome enough;
and as I began to listen to his old familiar voice, I could have
fancied he was still pursuing his long journey in search of his
darling niece.

'It's a mort of water,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'fur to come across, and
on'y stay a matter of fower weeks.  But water ('specially when 'tis
salt) comes nat'ral to me; and friends is dear, and I am heer.  -
Which is verse,' said Mr. Peggotty, surprised to find it out,
'though I hadn't such intentions.'

'Are you going back those many thousand miles, so soon?' asked
Agnes.

'Yes, ma'am,' he returned.  'I giv the promise to Em'ly, afore I
come away.  You see, I doen't grow younger as the years comes
round, and if I hadn't sailed as 'twas, most like I shouldn't never
have done 't.  And it's allus been on my mind, as I must come and
see Mas'r Davy and your own sweet blooming self, in your wedded
happiness, afore I got to be too old.'

He looked at us, as if he could never feast his eyes on us
sufficiently.  Agnes laughingly put back some scattered locks of
his grey hair, that he might see us better.

'And now tell us,' said I, 'everything relating to your fortunes.'

'Our fortuns, Mas'r Davy,' he rejoined, 'is soon told.  We haven't
fared nohows, but fared to thrive.  We've allus thrived.  We've
worked as we ought to 't, and maybe we lived a leetle hard at first
or so, but we have allus thrived.  What with sheep-farming, and
what with stock-farming, and what with one thing and what with
t'other, we are as well to do, as well could be.  Theer's been
kiender a blessing fell upon us,' said Mr. Peggotty, reverentially
inclining his head, 'and we've done nowt but prosper.  That is, in
the long run.  If not yesterday, why then today.  If not today, why
then tomorrow.'

'And Emily?' said Agnes and I, both together.

'Em'ly,' said he, 'arter you left her, ma'am - and I never heerd
her saying of her prayers at night, t'other side the canvas screen,
when we was settled in the Bush, but what I heerd your name - and
arter she and me lost sight of Mas'r Davy, that theer shining
sundown - was that low, at first, that, if she had know'd then what
Mas'r Davy kep from us so kind and thowtful, 'tis my opinion she'd
have drooped away.  But theer was some poor folks aboard as had
illness among 'em, and she took care of them; and theer was the
children in our company, and she took care of them; and so she got
to be busy, and to be doing good, and that helped her.'

'When did she first hear of it?' I asked.

'I kep it from her arter I heerd on 't,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'going
on nigh a year.  We was living then in a solitary place, but among
the beautifullest trees, and with the roses a-covering our Beein to
the roof.  Theer come along one day, when I was out a-working on
the land, a traveller from our own Norfolk or Suffolk in England (I
doen't rightly mind which), and of course we took him in, and giv
him to eat and drink, and made him welcome.  We all do that, all
the colony over.  He'd got an old newspaper with him, and some
other account in print of the storm.  That's how she know'd it. 
When I came home at night, I found she know'd it.'

He dropped his voice as he said these words, and the gravity I so
well remembered overspread his face.

'Did it change her much?' we asked.

'Aye, for a good long time,' he said, shaking his head; 'if not to
this present hour.  But I think the solitoode done her good.  And
she had a deal to mind in the way of poultry and the like, and
minded of it, and come through.  I wonder,' he said thoughtfully,
'if you could see my Em'ly now, Mas'r Davy, whether you'd know
her!'

'Is she so altered?' I inquired.

'I doen't know.  I see her ev'ry day, and doen't know; But,
odd-times, I have thowt so.  A slight figure,' said Mr. Peggotty,
looking at the fire, 'kiender worn; soft, sorrowful, blue eyes; a
delicate face; a pritty head, leaning a little down; a quiet voice
and way - timid a'most.  That's Em'ly!'

We silently observed him as he sat, still looking at the fire.

'Some thinks,' he said, 'as her affection was ill-bestowed; some,
as her marriage was broken off by death.  No one knows how 'tis. 
She might have married well, a mort of times, "but, uncle," she
says to me, "that's gone for ever." Cheerful along with me; retired
when others is by; fond of going any distance fur to teach a child,
or fur to tend a sick person, or fur to do some kindness tow'rds a
young girl's wedding (and she's done a many, but has never seen
one); fondly loving of her uncle; patient; liked by young and old;
sowt out by all that has any trouble.  That's Em'ly!'

He drew his hand across his face, and with a half-suppressed sigh
looked up from the fire.

'Is Martha with you yet?' I asked.

'Martha,' he replied, 'got married, Mas'r Davy, in the second year. 
A young man, a farm-labourer, as come by us on his way to market
with his mas'r's drays - a journey of over five hundred mile, theer
and back - made offers fur to take her fur his wife (wives is very
scarce theer), and then to set up fur their two selves in the Bush. 
She spoke to me fur to tell him her trew story.  I did.  They was
married, and they live fower hundred mile away from any voices but
their own and the singing birds.'

'Mrs. Gummidge?' I suggested.

It was a pleasant key to touch, for Mr. Peggotty suddenly burst
into a roar of laughter, and rubbed his hands up and down his legs,
as he had been accustomed to do when he enjoyed himself in the
long-shipwrecked boat.

'Would you believe it!' he said.  'Why, someun even made offer fur
to marry her! If a ship's cook that was turning settler, Mas'r
Davy, didn't make offers fur to marry Missis Gummidge, I'm Gormed
- and I can't say no fairer than that!'

I never saw Agnes laugh so.  This sudden ecstasy on the part of Mr.
Peggotty was so delightful to her, that she could not leave off
laughing; and the more she laughed the more she made me laugh, and
the greater Mr. Peggotty's ecstasy became, and the more he rubbed
his legs.

'And what did Mrs. Gummidge say?' I asked, when I was grave enough.

'If you'll believe me,' returned Mr. Peggotty, 'Missis Gummidge,
'stead of saying "thank you, I'm much obleeged to you, I ain't
a-going fur to change my condition at my time of life," up'd with
a bucket as was standing by, and laid it over that theer ship's
cook's head 'till he sung out fur help, and I went in and reskied
of him.'

Mr. Peggotty burst into a great roar of laughter, and Agnes and I
both kept him company.

'But I must say this, for the good creetur,' he resumed, wiping his
face, when we were quite exhausted; 'she has been all she said
she'd be to us, and more.  She's the willingest, the trewest, the
honestest-helping woman, Mas'r Davy, as ever draw'd the breath of
life.  I have never know'd her to be lone and lorn, for a single
minute, not even when the colony was all afore us, and we was new
to it.  And thinking of the old 'un is a thing she never done, I do
assure you, since she left England!'

'Now, last, not least, Mr. Micawber,' said I.  'He has paid off
every obligation he incurred here - even to Traddles's bill, you
remember my dear Agnes - and therefore we may take it for granted
that he is doing well.  But what is the latest news of him?'

Mr. Peggotty, with a smile, put his hand in his breast-pocket, and
produced a flat-folded, paper parcel, from which he took out, with
much care, a little odd-looking newspaper.

'You are to understan', Mas'r Davy,' said he, 'as we have left the
Bush now, being so well to do; and have gone right away round to
Port Middlebay Harbour, wheer theer's what we call a town.'

'Mr. Micawber was in the Bush near you?' said I.

'Bless you, yes,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'and turned to with a will. 
I never wish to meet a better gen'l'man for turning to with a will. 
I've seen that theer bald head of his a perspiring in the sun,
Mas'r Davy, till I a'most thowt it would have melted away.  And now
he's a Magistrate.'

'A Magistrate, eh?' said I.

Mr. Peggotty pointed to a certain paragraph in the newspaper, where
I read aloud as follows, from the Port Middlebay Times:

'The public dinner to our distinguished fellow-colonist and
townsman, WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, Port Middlebay District
Magistrate, came off yesterday in the large room of the Hotel,
which was crowded to suffocation.  It is estimated that not fewer
than forty-seven persons must have been accommodated with dinner at
one time, exclusive of the company in the passage and on the
stairs.  The beauty, fashion, and exclusiveness of Port Middlebay,
flocked to do honour to one so deservedly esteemed, so highly
talented, and so widely popular.  Doctor Mell (of Colonial
Salem-House Grammar School, Port Middlebay) presided, and on his
right sat the distinguished guest.  After the removal of the cloth,
and the singing of Non Nobis (beautifully executed, and in which we
were at no loss to distinguish the bell-like notes of that gifted
amateur, WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, JUNIOR), the usual loyal and
patriotic toasts were severally given and rapturously received. 
Doctor Mell, in a speech replete with feeling, then proposed "Our
distinguished Guest, the ornament of our town.  May he never leave
us but to better himself, and may his success among us be such as
to render his bettering himself impossible!" The cheering with
which the toast was received defies description.  Again and again
it rose and fell, like the waves of ocean.  At length all was
hushed, and WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, presented himself to return
thanks.  Far be it from us, in the present comparatively imperfect
state of the resources of our establishment, to endeavour to follow
our distinguished townsman through the smoothly-flowing periods of
his polished and highly-ornate address! Suffice it to observe, that
it was a masterpiece of eloquence; and that those passages in which
he more particularly traced his own successful career to its
source, and warned the younger portion of his auditory from the
shoals of ever incurring pecuniary liabilities which they were
unable to liquidate, brought a tear into the manliest eye present. 
The remaining toasts were DOCTOR MELL; Mrs. MICAWBER (who
gracefully bowed her acknowledgements from the side-door, where a
galaxy of beauty was elevated on chairs, at once to witness and
adorn the gratifying scene), Mrs. RIDGER BEGS (late Miss Micawber);
Mrs. MELL; WILKINS MICAWBER, ESQUIRE, JUNIOR (who convulsed the
assembly by humorously remarking that he found himself unable to
return thanks in a speech, but would do so, with their permission,
in a song); Mrs. MICAWBER'S FAMILY (well known, it is needless to
remark, in the mother-country), &c.  &c.  &c.  At the conclusion of
the proceedings the tables were cleared as if by art-magic for
dancing.  Among the votaries of TERPSICHORE, who disported
themselves until Sol gave warning for departure, Wilkins Micawber,
Esquire, Junior, and the lovely and accomplished Miss Helena,
fourth daughter of Doctor Mell, were particularly remarkable.'

I was looking back to the name of Doctor Mell, pleased to have
discovered, in these happier circumstances, Mr. Mell, formerly poor
pinched usher to my Middlesex magistrate, when Mr. Peggotty
pointing to another part of the paper, my eyes rested on my own
name, and I read thus:

'          TO DAVID COPPERFIELD, ESQUIRE,

               'THE EMINENT AUTHOR.

'My Dear Sir,

'Years have elapsed, since I had an opportunity of ocularly
perusing the lineaments, now familiar to the imaginations of a
considerable portion of the civilized world.

'But, my dear Sir, though estranged (by the force of circumstances
over which I have had no control) from the personal society of the
friend and companion of my youth, I have not been unmindful of his
soaring flight.  Nor have I been debarred,

     Though seas between us braid ha' roared,

(BURNS) from participating in the intellectual feasts he has spread
before us.

'I cannot, therefore, allow of the departure from this place of an
individual whom we mutually respect and esteem, without, my dear
Sir, taking this public opportunity of thanking you, on my own
behalf, and, I may undertake to add, on that of the whole of the
Inhabitants of Port Middlebay, for the gratification of which you
are the ministering agent.

'Go on, my dear Sir! You are not unknown here, you are not
unappreciated.  Though "remote", we are neither "unfriended",
"melancholy", nor (I may add) "slow".  Go on, my dear Sir, in your
Eagle course! The inhabitants of Port Middlebay may at least aspire
to watch it, with delight, with entertainment, with instruction!

'Among the eyes elevated towards you from this portion of the
globe, will ever be found, while it has light and life,

               'The
                    'Eye
                         'Appertaining to

                              'WILKINS MICAWBER,
                                   'Magistrate.'

I found, on glancing at the remaining contents of the newspaper,
that Mr. Micawber was a diligent and esteemed correspondent of that
journal.  There was another letter from him in the same paper,
touching a bridge; there was an advertisement of a collection of
similar letters by him, to be shortly republished, in a neat
volume, 'with considerable additions'; and, unless I am very much
mistaken, the Leading Article was his also.

We talked much of Mr. Micawber, on many other evenings while Mr.
Peggotty remained with us.  He lived with us during the whole term
of his stay, - which, I think, was something less than a month, -
and his sister and my aunt came to London to see him.  Agnes and I
parted from him aboard-ship, when he sailed; and we shall never
part from him more, on earth.

But before he left, he went with me to Yarmouth, to see a little
tablet I had put up in the churchyard to the memory of Ham.  While
I was copying the plain inscription for him at his request, I saw
him stoop, and gather a tuft of grass from the grave and a little
earth.

'For Em'ly,' he said, as he put it in his breast.  'I promised,
Mas'r Davy.'

CHAPTER 64
A LAST RETROSPECT

And now my written story ends.  I look back, once more - for the
last time - before I close these leaves.

I see myself, with Agnes at my side, journeying along the road of
life.  I see our children and our friends around us; and I hear the
roar of many voices, not indifferent to me as I travel on.

What faces are the most distinct to me in the fleeting crowd?  Lo,
these; all turning to me as I ask my thoughts the question!

Here is my aunt, in stronger spectacles, an old woman of four-score
years and more, but upright yet, and a steady walker of six miles
at a stretch in winter weather.

Always with her, here comes Peggotty, my good old nurse, likewise
in spectacles, accustomed to do needle-work at night very close to
the lamp, but never sitting down to it without a bit of wax candle,
a yard-measure in a little house, and a work-box with a picture of
St. Paul's upon the lid.

The cheeks and arms of Peggotty, so hard and red in my childish
days, when I wondered why the birds didn't peck her in preference
to apples, are shrivelled now; and her eyes, that used to darken
their whole neighbourhood in her face, are fainter (though they
glitter still); but her rough forefinger, which I once associated
with a pocket nutmeg-grater, is just the same, and when I see my
least child catching at it as it totters from my aunt to her, I
think of our little parlour at home, when I could scarcely walk. 
My aunt's old disappointment is set right, now.  She is godmother
to a real living Betsey Trotwood; and Dora (the next in order) says
she spoils her.

There is something bulky in Peggotty's pocket.  It is nothing
smaller than the Crocodile Book, which is in rather a dilapidated
condition by this time, with divers of the leaves torn and stitched
across, but which Peggotty exhibits to the children as a precious
relic.  I find it very curious to see my own infant face, looking
up at me from the Crocodile stories; and to be reminded by it of my
old acquaintance Brooks of Sheffield.

Among my boys, this summer holiday time, I see an old man making
giant kites, and gazing at them in the air, with a delight for
which there are no words.  He greets me rapturously, and whispers,
with many nods and winks, 'Trotwood, you will be glad to hear that
I shall finish the Memorial when I have nothing else to do, and
that your aunt's the most extraordinary woman in the world, sir!'

Who is this bent lady, supporting herself by a stick, and showing
me a countenance in which there are some traces of old pride and
beauty, feebly contending with a querulous, imbecile, fretful
wandering of the mind?  She is in a garden; and near her stands a
sharp, dark, withered woman, with a white scar on her lip.  Let me
hear what they say.

'Rosa, I have forgotten this gentleman's name.'

Rosa bends over her, and calls to her, 'Mr. Copperfield.'

'I am glad to see you, sir.  I am sorry to observe you are in
mourning.  I hope Time will be good to you.'

Her impatient attendant scolds her, tells her I am not in mourning,
bids her look again, tries to rouse her.

'You have seen my son, sir,' says the elder lady.  'Are you
reconciled?'

Looking fixedly at me, she puts her hand to her forehead, and
moans.  Suddenly, she cries, in a terrible voice, 'Rosa, come to
me.  He is dead!' Rosa kneeling at her feet, by turns caresses her,
and quarrels with her; now fiercely telling her, 'I loved him
better than you ever did!'- now soothing her to sleep on her
breast, like a sick child.  Thus I leave them; thus I always find
them; thus they wear their time away, from year to year.

What ship comes sailing home from India, and what English lady is
this, married to a growling old Scotch Croesus with great flaps of
ears?  Can this be Julia Mills?

Indeed it is Julia Mills, peevish and fine, with a black man to
carry cards and letters to her on a golden salver, and a
copper-coloured woman in linen, with a bright handkerchief round
her head, to serve her Tiffin in her dressing-room.  But Julia
keeps no diary in these days; never sings Affection's Dirge;
eternally quarrels with the old Scotch Croesus, who is a sort of
yellow bear with a tanned hide.  Julia is steeped in money to the
throat, and talks and thinks of nothing else.  I liked her better
in the Desert of Sahara.

Or perhaps this IS the Desert of Sahara! For, though Julia has a
stately house, and mighty company, and sumptuous dinners every day,
I see no green growth near her; nothing that can ever come to fruit
or flower.  What Julia calls 'society', I see; among it Mr. Jack
Maldon, from his Patent Place, sneering at the hand that gave it
him, and speaking to me of the Doctor as 'so charmingly antique'. 
But when society is the name for such hollow gentlemen and ladies,
Julia, and when its breeding is professed indifference to
everything that can advance or can retard mankind, I think we must
have lost ourselves in that same Desert of Sahara, and had better
find the way out.

And lo, the Doctor, always our good friend, labouring at his
Dictionary (somewhere about the letter D), and happy in his home
and wife.  Also the Old Soldier, on a considerably reduced footing,
and by no means so influential as in days of yore!

Working at his chambers in the Temple, with a busy aspect, and his
hair (where he is not bald) made more rebellious than ever by the
constant friction of his lawyer's-wig, I come, in a later time,
upon my dear old Traddles.  His table is covered with thick piles
of papers; and I say, as I look around me:

'If Sophy were your clerk, now, Traddles, she would have enough to
do!'

'You may say that, my dear Copperfield! But those were capital
days, too, in Holborn Court! Were they not?'

'When she told you you would be a judge?  But it was not the town
talk then!'

'At all events,' says Traddles, 'if I ever am one -'
'Why, you know you will be.'

'Well, my dear Copperfield, WHEN I am one, I shall tell the story,
as I said I would.'

We walk away, arm in arm.  I am going to have a family dinner with
Traddles.  It is Sophy's birthday; and, on our road, Traddles
discourses to me of the good fortune he has enjoyed.

'I really have been able, my dear Copperfield, to do all that I had
most at heart.  There's the Reverend Horace promoted to that living
at four hundred and fifty pounds a year; there are our two boys
receiving the very best education, and distinguishing themselves as
steady scholars and good fellows; there are three of the girls
married very comfortably; there are three more living with us;
there are three more keeping house for the Reverend Horace since
Mrs. Crewler's decease; and all of them happy.'

'Except -' I suggest.

'Except the Beauty,' says Traddles.  'Yes.  It was very unfortunate
that she should marry such a vagabond.  But there was a certain
dash and glare about him that caught her.  However, now we have got
her safe at our house, and got rid of him, we must cheer her up
again.'

Traddles's house is one of the very houses - or it easily may have
been - which he and Sophy used to parcel out, in their evening
walks.  It is a large house; but Traddles keeps his papers in his
dressing-room and his boots with his papers; and he and Sophy
squeeze themselves into upper rooms, reserving the best bedrooms
for the Beauty and the girls.  There is no room to spare in the
house; for more of 'the girls' are here, and always are here, by
some accident or other, than I know how to count.  Here, when we go
in, is a crowd of them, running down to the door, and handing
Traddles about to be kissed, until he is out of breath.  Here,
established in perpetuity, is the poor Beauty, a widow with a
little girl; here, at dinner on Sophy's birthday, are the three
married girls with their three husbands, and one of the husband's
brothers, and another husband's cousin, and another husband's
sister, who appears to me to be engaged to the cousin.  Traddles,
exactly the same simple, unaffected fellow as he ever was, sits at
the foot of the large table like a Patriarch; and Sophy beams upon
him, from the head, across a cheerful space that is certainly not
glittering with Britannia metal.

And now, as I close my task, subduing my desire to linger yet,
these faces fade away.  But one face, shining on me like a Heavenly
light by which I see all other objects, is above them and beyond
them all.  And that remains.

I turn my head, and see it, in its beautiful serenity, beside me.

My lamp burns low, and I have written far into the night; but the
dear presence, without which I were nothing, bears me company.

O Agnes, O my soul, so may thy face be by me when I close my life
indeed; so may I, when realities are melting from me, like the
shadows which I now dismiss, still find thee near me, pointing
upward!


and still, looking fixedly at the ground.

  As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-two
were brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace him,
as having a knowledge of him. It thrilled him with a great dread of
discovery; but the man went on. A very few moments after that, a young
woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare face in which there
was no vestige of colour, and large widely opened patient eyes, rose
from the seat where he had observed her sitting, and came to speak
to him.

  "Citizen Evremonde," she said, touching him with her cold hand. "I
am a poor little seamstress, who was with you in La Force."

  He murmured for answer: "True. I forget what you were accused of?"

  "Plots. Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any. Is
it likely? Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak
creature like me?

  The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tears
started from his eyes.

  "I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing.
I am not unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much good
to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know how that can
be, Citizen Evremonde. Such a poor weak little creature!"

  As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to,
it warmed and softened to this pitiable girl.

  "I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was true?"

  "It was. But, I was again taken and condemned."

  "If I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold
your hand? I am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give
me more courage."

  As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt
in them, and then astonishment. He pressed the work-worn,
hunger-worn young fingers, and touched his lips.

  "Are you dying for him?" she whispered.

  "And his wife and child. Hush! Yes."

  "O you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?"

  "Hush! Yes, my poor sister; to the last."

  The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in
that same hour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd
about it, when a coach going out of Paris drives up to be examined.

  "Who goes here? Whom have we within? Papers!"

  The papers are handed out, and read.

  "Alexandre Manette. Physician. French. Which is he?"

  This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering old
man pointed out.

  "Apparently the Citizen-Doctor is not in his right mind? The
Revolution-fever will have been too much for him?"

  Greatly too much for him.

  "Hah! Many suffer with it. Lucie. His daughter. French. Which is
she?"

  This is she.

  "Apparently it must be. Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?"

  It is.

  "Hah! Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere. Lucie, her child.
English. This is she?"

  She and no other.

  "Kiss me, child of Evremonde. Now, thou hast kissed a good
Republican; something new in thy family; remember it! Sydney Carton.
Advocate. English. Which is he?"

  He lies here, in this corner of the carriage. He, too, is pointed
out.

  "Apparently the English advocate is in a swoon?"

  It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented
that he is not in strong health, and has separated sadly from a friend
who is under the displeasure of the Republic.

  "Is that all? It is not a great deal, that! Many are under the
displeasure of the Republic, and must look out at the little window.
Jarvis Lorry.

  Banker. English. Which is he?"

  "I am he. Necessarily, being the last."

  It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions. It
is Jarvis Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the coach
door, replying to a group of officials. They leisurely walk round
the carriage and leisurely mount the box, to look at what little
luggage it carries on the roof; the country-people hanging about,
press nearer to the coach doors and greedily stare in; a little child,
carried by its mother, has its short arm held out for it, that it
may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to the Guillotine.

  "Behold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned."

  "One can depart, citizen?"

  "One can depart. Forward, my postilions! A good journey!"

  "I salute you, citizens.- And the first danger passed!"

  These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands,
and looks upward. There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping,
there is the heavy breathing of the insensible traveller.

  "Are we not going too slowly? Can they not be induced to go faster?"
asks Lucie, clinging to the old man.

  "It would seem like flight, my darling. I must not urge them too
much; it would rouse suspicion."

  "Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued!"

  "The road is clear, my dearest. So far, we are not pursued."

  Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous
buildings, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues
of leafless trees. The hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep
mud is on either side. Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud,
to avoid the stones that clatter us and shake us; sometimes, we
stick in ruts and sloughs there. The agony of our impatience is then
so great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for getting out
and running- hiding- doing anything but stopping.

  Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings,
solitary farms, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos
and threes, avenues of leafless trees. Have these men deceived us, and
taken us back by another road? Is not this the same place twice
over? Thank Heaven, no. A village. Look back, look back, and see if we
are pursued! Hush! the posting-house.

  Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach
stands in the little street, bereft of horses, and with no
likelihood upon it of ever moving again; leisurely, the new horses
come into visible existence, one by one; leisurely, the new postilions
follow, sucking, and plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely,
the old postilions count their money, make wrong additions, and arrive
at dissatisfied results. All the time, our overfraught hearts are
beating at a rate that would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the
fastest horses ever foaled.

  At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are
left behind. We are through the village, up the hill, and down the
hill, and on the low watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions exchange
speech with animated gesticulation, and the horses are pulled up,
almost on their haunches. We are pursued?

  "Ho! Within the carriage there. Speak then!"

  "What is it?" asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window.

  "How many did they say?"

  "I do not understand you."

  "-At the last post. How many to the Guillotine to-day?"

  "Fifty-two."

  "I said so! A brave number! My fellow-citizen here would have it
forty-two; ten more heads are worth having. The Guillotine goes
handsomely. I love it. Hi forward. Whoop!"

  The night comes on dark. He moves more; he is beginning to revive,
and to speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he
asks him, by his name, what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind
Heaven, and help us! Look out, look out, and see if we are pursued.

  The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us,
and the moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in
pursuit of us; but, so far, we are pursued by nothing else.

  XIV

  THE KNITTING DONE

  IN THAT SAME JUNCTURE Of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their
fate Madame Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and
Jacques Three of the Revolutionary Jury. Not in the wine-shop did
Madame Defarge confer with these ministers, but in the shed of the
woodsawyer, erst a mender of roads. The sawyer himself did not
participate in the conference, but abided at a little distance, like
an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or to offer an
opinion until invited.

  "But our Defarge," said Jacques Three, "is undoubtedly a good
Republican? Eh?"

  "There is no better," the voluble Vengeance protested in her
shrill notes, "in France."

  "Peace, little Vengeance," said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with
a slight frown on her lieutenant's lips, "hear me speak. My husband,
fellow-citizen, is a good Republican and a bold man; he has deserved
well of the Republic, and possesses its confidence. But my husband has
his weaknesses, and he is so weak as to relent towards this Doctor."

  "It is a great pity," croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his
head, with his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; "it is not quite
like a good citizen; it is a thing to regret."

  "See you," said madame, "I care nothing for this Doctor, I. He may
wear his head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all
one to me. But, the Evremonde people are to be exterminated, and the
wife and child must follow the husband and father."

  "She has a fine head for it," croaked Jacques Three. "I have seen
blue eyes and golden hair there, and they looked charming when
Samson held them up." Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure.

  Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little.

  "The child also," observed Jacques Three, with a meditative
enjoyment of his words, "has golden hair and blue eyes. And we
seldom have a child there. It is a pretty sight!"

  "In a word," said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short
abstraction, "I cannot trust my husband in this matter. Not only do
I feel, since last night, that I dare not confide to him the details
of my projects; but also I feel that if I delay, there is danger of
his giving warning, and then they might escape."

  "That must never be," croaked Jacques Three; "no one must escape. We
have not half enough as it is. We ought to have six score a day."

  "In a word," Madame Defarge went on, "my husband has not my reason
for pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason
for regarding this Doctor with any sensibility. I must act for myself,
therefore. Come hither, little citizen."

  The wood-sawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in the
submission, of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap.

  "Touching those signals, little citizen," said Madame Defarge,
sternly, "that she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear
witness to them this very day?"

  "Ay, ay, why not!" cried the sawyer. "Every day, in all weathers,
from two to four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one,
sometimes without. I know what I know. I have seen with my eyes."

  He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidental
imitation of some few of the great diversity of signals that he had
never seen.

  "Clearly plots," said Jacques Three. "Transparently!"

  "There is no doubt of the Jury?" inquired Madame Defarge, letting
her eyes turn to him with a gloomy smile.

  "Rely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness. I answer for my
fellow Jurymen."

  "Now, let me see," said Madame Defarge, pondering again. "Yet once
more! Can I spare this Doctor to my husband? I have no feeling
either way. Can I spare him?"

  "He would count as one head," observed Jacques Three, in a low
voice. "We really have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think."

  "He was signalling with her when I saw her," argued Madame
Defarge; "I cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be
silent, and trust the case wholly to him, this little citizen here.
For, I am not a bad witness."

  The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their
fervent protestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous
of witnesses. The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to
be a celestial witness.

  "He must take his chance," said Madame Defarge. "No, I cannot
spare him! You are engaged at three o'clock; you are going to see
the batch of to-day executed.- You?"

  The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly replied
in the affirmative: seizing the occasion to add that he was the most
ardent of Republicans, and that he would be in effect the most
desolate of Republicans, if anything prevented him from enjoying the
pleasure of smoking his afternoon pipe in the contemplation of the
droll national barber. He was so very demonstrative herein, that he
might have been suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes that looked
contemptuously at him out of Madame Defarge's head) of having his
small individual fears for his own personal safety, every hour in
the day.

  "I," said madame, "am equally engaged at the same place. After it is
over- say at eight to-night- come you to me, in Saint Antoine, and
we will give information against these people at my Section."

  The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the
citizeness. The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed,
evaded her glance as a small dog would have done, retreated among
his wood, and hid his confusion over the handle of his saw.

  Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little
nearer to the door, and there expounded her further views to them
thus:

  "She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death. She will
be mourning and grieving. She will be in a state of mind to impeach
the justice of the Republic. She will be full of sympathy with its
enemies. I will go to her."

  "What an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!" exclaimed Jacques
Three, rapturously. "Ah, my cherished!" cried The Vengeance; and
embraced her.

  "Take you my knitting," said Madame Defarge, placing it in her
lieutenant's hands, "and have it ready for me in my usual seat. Keep
me my usual chair. Go you there, straight, for there will probably
be a greater concourse than usual, to-day."

  "I willingly obey the orders of my Chief," said The Vengeance with
alacrity, and kissing her cheek. "You will not be late?"

  "I shall be there before the commencement."

  "And before the tumbrils arrive. Be sure you are there, my soul,"
said The Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned into
the street, "before the tumbrils arrive!"

  Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and
might be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the
mud, and round the corner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and the
Juryman, looking after her as she walked away, were highly
appreciative of her fine figure, and her superb moral endowments.

  There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a
dreadfully disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to
be dreaded than this ruthless woman, now taking her way along the
streets. Of a strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense and
readiness, of great determination, of that kind of beauty which not
only seems to impart to its possessor firmness and animosity, but to
strike into others an instinctive recognition of those qualities;
the troubled time would have heaved her up, under any circumstances.
But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of wrong, and
an inveterate hatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into
a tigress. She was absolutely without pity. If she had ever had the
virtue in her, it had quite gone out of her.

  It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the
sins of his forefathers; she saw, not him, but them. It was nothing to
her, that his wife was to be made a widow and his daughter an
orphan; that was insufficient punishment, because they were her
natural enemies and her prey, and as such had no right to live. To
appeal to her, was made hopeless by her having no sense of pity,
even for herself. If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of
the many encounters in which she had been engaged, she would not
have pitied herself; nor, if she had been ordered to the axe
to-morrow, would she have gone to it with any softer feeling than a
fierce desire to change places with the man who sent here there.

  Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe. Carelessly
worn, it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her
dark hair looked rich under her coarse red cap. Lying hidden in her
bosom, was a loaded pistol. Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened
dagger. Thus accoutred, and walking with the confident tread of such a
character, and with the supple freedom of a woman who had habitually
walked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, on the brown
sea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.

  Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment
waiting for the completion of its load, had been planned out last
night, the difficulty of taking Miss Pross in it had much engaged
Mr. Lorry's attention. It was not merely desirable to avoid
overloading the coach, but it was of the highest importance that the
time occupied in examining it and its passengers, should be reduced to
the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of only a
few seconds here and there. Finally, he had proposed, after anxious
consideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty to leave
the city, should leave it at three o'clock in the lightest-wheeled
conveyance known to that period. Unencumbered with luggage, they would
soon overtake the coach, and, passing it and preceding it on the road,
would order its horses in advance, and greatly facilitate its progress
during the precious hours of the night, when delay was the most to
be dreaded.

  Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in
that pressing emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy. She and
Jerry had beheld the coach start, had known who it was that Solomon
brought, had passed some ten minutes in tortures of suspense, and were
now concluding their arrangements to follow the coach, even as
Madame Defarge, taking her way through the streets, now drew nearer
and nearer to the else-deserted lodging in which they held their
consultation.

  "Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose
agitation was so great that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move,
or live: "what do you think of our not starting from this courtyard?
Another carriage having already gone from here to-day, it might awaken
suspicion."

  "My opinion, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "is as you're right.
Likewise wot I'll stand by you, right or wrong."

  "I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious
creatures," said Miss Pross, wildly crying, "that I am incapable of
forming any plan. Are you capable of forming any plan, my dear good
Mr. Cruncher?"

  "Respectin' a future spear o' life, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "I
hope so. Respectin' any present use o' this here blessed old head o'
mind, I think not. Would you do me the favour, miss, to take notice o'
two promises and wows wot it is my wishes fur to record in this here
crisis?"

  "Oh, for gracious sake!" cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying,
"record them at once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent
man."

  "First," said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who
spoke with an ashy and solemn visage, "them poor things well out o'
this, never no more will I do it, never no more!"

  "I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher," returned Miss Pross, "that you
never will do it again, whatever it is, and I be, you not to think
it necessary to mention more particularly what it is."

  "No, miss," returned Jerry, "it shall not be named to you. Second:
them poor things well out o' this, and never no more will I
interfere with Mrs. Cruncher's flopping, never no more!"

  "Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be," said Miss Pross,
striving to dry her eyes and compose herself, "I have no doubt it is
best that Mrs. Cruncher should have it entirely under her own
superintendence.- O my poor darlings!"

  "I go so far as to say, miss, moreover," proceeded Mr. Cruncher,
with a most alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit- "and let
my words be took down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourself- that
wot my opinions respectin' flopping has undergone a change, and that
wot I only hope with all my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a flopping
at the present time."

  "There, there, there! I hope she is, my dear man," cried the
distracted Miss Pross, "and I hope she finds it answering her
expectations."

  "Forbid it," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity,
additional slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold
out, "as anything wot I have ever said or done should be visited on my
earnest wishes for them poor creeturs now! Forbid it as we shouldn't
all flop (if it was anyways conwenient) to get 'em out o' this here
dismal risk! Forbid it, miss! Wot I say, for-BID it!" This was Mr.
Cruncher's conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour to find
a better one.

  And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came
nearer and nearer.

  "If we ever get back to our native land," said Miss Pross, "you
may rely upon my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to
remember and understand of what you have so impressively said; and
at all events you may be sure that I shall bear witness to your
being thoroughly in earnest at this dreadful time. Now, pray let us
think! My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us think!"

  Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came
nearer and nearer.

  "If you were to go before," said Miss Pross, "and stop the vehicle
and horses from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me;
wouldn't that be best?"

  Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best.

  "Where could you wait for me?" asked Miss Pross.

  Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality
but Temple Bar. Alas! Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and
Madame Defarge was drawing very near indeed.

  "By the cathedral door," said Miss Pross. "Would it be much out of
the way, to take me in, near the great cathedral door between the
two towers?"

  "No, miss," answered Mr. Cruncher.

  "Then, like the best of men," said Miss Pross, "go to the
posting-house straight, and make that change."

  "I am doubtful," said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head,
"about leaving of you, you see. We don't know what may happen."

  "Heaven knows we don't," returned Miss Pross, "but have no fear
for me. Take me in at the cathedral, at Three o'Clock, or as near it
as you can, and I am sure it will be better than our going from
here. I feel certain of it. There! Bless you, Mr. Cruncher! Think- not
of me, but of the lives that may depend on both of us!"

  This exordium, and Miss Pross's two hands in quite agonised entreaty
clasping his, decided Mr. Cruncher. With an encouraging nod or two, he
immediately went out to alter the arrangements, and left her by
herself to follow as she had proposed.

  The having originated a precaution which was already in course of
execution, was a great relief to Miss Pross. The necessity of
composing her appearance so that it should attract no special notice
in the streets, was another relief. She looked at her watch, and it
was twenty minutes past two. She had no time to lose, but must get
ready at once.

  Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the
deserted rooms, and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind every
open door in them, Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and began
laving her eyes, which were swollen and red. Haunted by her feverish
apprehensions, she could not bear to have her sight obscured for a
minute at a time by the dripping water, but constantly paused and
looked round to see that there was no one watching her. In one of
those pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figure standing
in the room.

  The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the
feet of Madame Defarge. By strange stern ways, and through much
staining blood, those feet had come to meet that water.

  Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, "The wife of
Evremonde; where is she?"

  It flashed upon Miss Pross's mind that the doors were all standing
open, and would suggest the flight. Her first act was to shut them.
There were four in the room, and she shut them all. She then placed
herself before the door of the chamber which Lucie had occupied.

  Madame Defarge's dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement,
and rested on her when it was finished. Miss Pross had nothing
beautiful about her; years had not tamed the wildness, or softened the
grimness, of her appearance; but, she too was a determined woman in
her different way, and she measured Madame Defarge with her eyes,
every inch.

  "You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer," said Miss
Pross, in her breathing. "Nevertheless, you shall not get the better
of me. I am an Englishwoman."

  Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of
Miss Pross's own perception that they two were at bay. She saw a
tight, hard, wiry woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the
same figure a woman with a strong hand, in the years gone by. She knew
full well that Miss Pross was the family's devoted friend; Miss
Pross knew full well that Madame Defarge was the family's malevolent
enemy.

  "On my way yonder," said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of
her hand towards the fatal spot, "where they reserve my chair and my
knitting for me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing. I
wish to see her."

  "I know that your intentions are evil," said Miss Pross, "and you
may depend upon it, I'll hold my own against them."

  Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other's
words; both were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and
manner, what the unintelligible words meant.

  "It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this
moment," said Madame Defarge. "Good patriots will know what that
means. Let me see her. Go tell her that I wish to see her. Do you
hear?"

  "If those eyes of yours were bed-winches," returned Miss Pross, "and
I was an English four-poster, they shouldn't loose a splinter of me.
No, you wicked foreign woman; I am your match."

  Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks in
detail; but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she was
set at naught.

  "Woman imbecile and pig-like!" said Madame Defarge, frowning. "I
take no answer from you. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I
demand to see her, or stand out of the way of the door and let me go
to her!" This, with an angry explanatory wave of her right arm.

  "I little thought," said Miss Pross, "that I should ever want to
understand your nonsensical language; but I would give all I have,
except the clothes I wear, to know whether you suspect the truth, or
any part of it."

  Neither of them for a single moment released the other's eyes.
Madame Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss
Pross first became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step.

  "I am a Briton," said Miss Pross, "I am desperate. I don't care an
English Twopence for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here,
the greater hope there is for my Ladybird. I'll not leave a handful of
that dark hair upon your head, if you lay a finger on me!"

  Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes
between every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath.
Thus Miss Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life.

  But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought the
irrepressible tears into her eyes. This was a courage that Madame
Defarge so little comprehended as to mistake for weakness. "Ha, ha!"
she laughed, "you poor wretch! What are you worth! I address myself to
that Doctor." Then she raised her voice and called out, "Citizen
Doctor! Wife of Evremonde! Child of Evremonde! Any person but this
miserable fool, answer the Citizeness Defarge!"

  Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in the
expression of Miss Pross's face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from
either suggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone.
Three of the doors she opened swiftly, and looked in.

  "Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing,
there are odds and ends upon the ground. There is no one in that
room behind you! Let me look."

  "Never!" said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as
Madame Defarge understood the answer.

  "If they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued and
brought back," said Madame Defarge to herself.

  "As long as you don't know whether they are in that room or not, you
are uncertain what to do," said Miss Pross to herself; "and you
shall not know that, if I can prevent your knowing it; and know
that, or not know that, you shall not leave here while I can hold
you."

  "I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped
me, I will tear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door,"
said Madame Defarge.

  "We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard, we
are not likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep you
here, while every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand
guineas to my darling," said Miss Pross.

  Madame Defarge made at the door. Miss Pross, on the instinct of
the moment, seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held
her tight. It was in vain for Madame Defarge to struggle and to
strike; Miss Pross, with the vigorous tenacity of love, always so much
stronger than hate, clasped her tight, and even lifted her from the
floor in the struggle that they had. The two hands of Madame Defarge
buffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down,
held her round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold
of a drowning woman.

  Soon, Madame Defarge's hands ceased to strike, and felt at her
encircled waist. "It is under my arm," said Miss Pross, in smothered
tones, "you shall not draw it. I am stronger than you, I bless
Heaven for it. I hold you till one or other of us faints or dies!"

  Madame Defarge's hands were at her bosom. Miss Pross looked up,
saw what it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and
stood alone- blinded with smoke.

  All this was in a second. As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful
stillness, it passed out on the air, like the soul of the furious
woman whose body lay lifeless on the ground.

  In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed
the body as far from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to
call for fruitless help. Happily, she bethought herself of the
consequences of what she did, in time to check herself and go back. It
was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, she did go in, and
even went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that she must
wear. These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting and
locking the door and taking away the key. She then sat down on the
stairs a few moments to breathe and to cry, and then got up and
hurried away.

  By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly
have gone along the streets without being stopped. By good fortune,
too, she was naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to show
disfigurement like any other woman. She needed both advantages, for
the marks of griping fingers were deep in her face, and her hair was
torn, and her dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) was
clutched and dragged a hundred ways.

  In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river.
Arriving at the cathedral some few minutes before her escort, and
waiting there, she thought, what if the key were already taken in a
net, what if it were identified, what if the door were opened and
the remains discovered, what if she were stopped at the gate, sent
to prison, and charged with murder! In the midst of these fluttering
thoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away.

  "Is there any noise in the streets?" she asked him.

  "The usual noises," Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by
the question and by her aspect.

  "I don't hear you," said Miss Pross. "What do you say?"

  It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross
could not hear him. "So I'll nod my head," thought Mr. Cruncher,
amazed, "at all events she'll see that." And she did.

  "Is there any noise in the streets now?" asked Miss Pross again,
presently.

  Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head.

  "I don't hear it."

  "Gone deaf in an hour?" said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mind
much disturbed; "wot's come to her?"

  "I feel," said Miss Pross, "as if there had been a flash and a
crash, and that crash was the last thing I should ever hear in this
life."

  "Blest if she ain't in a queer condition!" said Mr. Cruncher, more
and more disturbed. "Wot can she have been a takin', to keep her
courage up? Hark! There's the roll of them dreadful carts! You can
hear that, miss?"

  "I can hear," said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her,
"nothing. O, my good man, there was first a great crash, and then a
great stillness, and that stillness seems to be fixed and
unchangeable, never to be broken any more as long as my life lasts."

  "If she don't hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh
their journey's end," said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder,
"it's my opinion that indeed she never will hear anything else in this
world."

  And indeed she never did.

  XV

  THE FOOTSTEPS DIE OUT FOR EVER

  ALONG THE PARIS STREETS, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh.
Six tumbrils carry the day's wine to La Guillotine. All the
devouring and insatiate Monsters imagined since imagination could
record itself, are fused in the one realisation, Guillotine. And yet
there is not in France, with its rich variety of soil and climate, a
blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow to
maturity under conditions more certain than those that have produced
this horror. Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similar
hammers, and it will twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow
the same seed of rapacious license and oppression over again, and it
will surely yield the same fruit according to its kind.

  Six tumbrils roll along the streets. Change these back again to what
they were, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to be
the carriages of absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles,
the toilettes of flaring Jezebels, the churches that are not my
father's house but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starving
peasants! No; the great magician who majestically works out the
appointed order of the Creator, never reverses his transformations.
"If thou be changed into this shape by the will of God," say the seers
to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, "then remain so! But,
if thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resume
thy former aspect!" Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.

  As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to
plough up a long crooked furrow among the populace in the streets.
Ridges of faces are thrown to this side and to that, and the ploughs
go steadily onward. So used are the regular inhabitants of the
houses to the spectacle, that in many windows there are no people, and
in some the occupation of the hands is not so much as suspended,
while, the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils. Here and there,
the inmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger,
with something of the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent,
to this cart and to this, and seems to tell who sat here yesterday,
and who there the day before.

  Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all
things on their last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with a
lingering interest in the ways of life and men. Some, seated with
drooping heads, are sunk in silent despair; again, there are some so
heedful of their looks that they cast upon the multitude such
glances as they have seen in theatres, and in pictures. Several
close their eyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughts
together. Only one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect,
is so shattered and made drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries
to dance. Not one of the whole number appeals by look or gesture, to
the pity of the people.

  There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils,
and faces are often turned up to some of them, and they are asked some
question. It would seem to be always the same question, for, it is
always followed by a press of people towards the third cart. The
horsemen abreast of that cart, frequently point out one man in it with
their swords. The leading curiosity is, to know which is he; he stands
at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down, to converse with
a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart, and holds his hand. He
has no curiosity or care for the scene about him, and always speaks to
to the girl. Here and there in the long street of St. Honore, cries
are raised against him. If they move him at all, it is only to a
quiet smile, as he shakes his hair a little more loosely about his
face. He cannot easily touch his face, his arms being bound.

  On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils,
stands the Spy and prison-sheep. He looks into the first of them:
not there. He looks into the second: not there. He already asks
himself, "Has he sacrificed me?" when his face clears, as he looks
into the third.

  "Which is Evremonde?" says a man behind him.

  "That. At the back there."

  "With his hand in the girl's?"

  "Yes."

  The man cries, "Down, Evremonde To the Guillotine all aristocrats!
Down, Evremonde!"

  "Hush, hush!" the Spy entreats him, timidly.

  "And why not, citizen?"

  "He is going to pay the forfeit: it will be paid in five minutes
more. Let him be at peace."

  But the man continuing to exclaim, "Down, Evremonde!" the face of
Evremonde is for a moment turned towards him. Evremonde then sees
the Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.

  The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among
the populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution,
and end. The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in
and close behind the last plough as it passes on, for all are
following to the Guillotine. In front of it, seated in chairs, as in a
garden of public diversion, are a number of women, busily knitting. On
one of the foremost chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking about for
her friend.

  "Therese!" she cries, in her shrill tones. "Who has seen her?
Therese Defarge!"

  "She never missed before," says a knitting-woman of the sisterhood.

  "No; nor will she miss now," cries The Vengeance, petulantly.

  "Therese."

  "Louder," the woman recommends.

  Ay! Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear
thee. Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet
it will hardly bring her. Send other women up and down to seek her,
lingering somewhere; and yet, although the messengers have done
dread deeds, it is questionable whether of their own wills they will
go far enough to find her!

  "Bad Fortune!" cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the
chair, "and here are the tumbrils! And Evremonde will be despatched in
a wink, and she not here! See her knitting in my hand, and her empty
chair ready for her. I cry with vexation and disappointment!"

  As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the
tumbrils begin to discharge their loads. The ministers of Sainte
Guillotine are robed and ready. Crash!- A head is held up, and the
knitting-women who scarcely lifted their eyes to look at it a moment
ago when it could think and speak, count One.

  The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up. Crash!-
And the knitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their work,
count Two.

  The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out
next after him. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting
out, but still holds it as he promised. He gently places her with
her back to the crashing engine that constantly whirrs up and falls,
and she looks into his face and thanks him.

  "But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am
naturally a poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have
been able to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we
might have hope and comfort here to-day. I think you were sent to me
by Heaven."

  "Or you to me," says Sydney Carton. "Keep your eyes upon me, dear
child, and mind no other object."

  "I mind nothing while I hold your band. I shall mind nothing when
I let it go, if they are rapid."

  "They will be rapid. Fear not!"

  The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speak
as if they were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand, heart
to heart, these two children of the Universal Mother, else so wide
apart and differing, have come together on the dark highway, to repair
home together, and to rest in her bosom.

  "Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last
question? I am very ignorant, and it troubles me- just a little."

  "Tell me what it is."

  "I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself,
whom I love very dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she
lives in a farmer's house in the south country. Poverty parted us, and
she knows nothing of my fate- for I cannot write- and if I could,
how should I tell her! It is better as it is."

  "Yes, yes: better as it is."

  "What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still
thinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so
much support, is this:- If the Republic really does good to the
poor, and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less,
she may live a long time: she may even live to be old."

  "What then, my gentle sister?"

  "Do you think:" the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much
endurance, fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and
tremble: "that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in the
better land where I trust both you and I will be mercifully
sheltered?"

  "It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble
there."

  "You comfort me so much! I am so ignorant. Am I to kiss you now?
Is the moment come?"

  "Yes."

  She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other.
The spare hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse
than a sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face. She goes next
before him- is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two.

  "I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

  The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the
pressing on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that
it swells forward in a mass, like one great heave of water, all
flashes away. Twenty-Three.

  They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the
peacefullest man's face ever beheld there. Many added that he looked
sublime and prophetic.

  One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axe- a woman- had
asked at the foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be allowed
to write down the thoughts that were inspiring her. If he had given
any utterance to his, and they were prophetic, they would have been
these:

  "I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the
Judge, long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the
destruction of the old, perishing by this retributive instrument,
before it shall cease out of its present use. I see a beautiful city
and a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in their struggles
to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long long
to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time of which
this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for itself and
wearing out.

  "I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful,
prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see
Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name. I see her
father, aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to all men
in his healing office, and at peace. I see the good old man, so long
their friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all he has, and
passing tranquilly to his reward.

  "I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of
their descendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping
for me on the anniversary of this day. I see her and her husband,
their course done, lying side by side in their last earthly bed, and I
know that each was not more honoured and held sacred in the other's
soul, than I was in the souls of both.

  "I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man
winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him
winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the
light of his. I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away. I see
him, foremost of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of my
name, with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place- then
fair to look upon, with not a trace of this day's disfigurement- and I
hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a faltering voice.

  "It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done;
it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known."

.
brought forward by degrees.  For, a rush from scanty feeding to 
generous feeding, and from what you may call messing to what you 
may call method, do require a power of constitution which is not 
often found in youth, particular when undermined by boarding-
school!'

It will be seen that the Billickin now openly pitted herself 
against Miss Twinkleton, as one whom she had fully ascertained to 
be her natural enemy.

'Your remarks,' returned Miss Twinkleton, from a remote moral 
eminence, 'are well meant, I have no doubt; but you will permit me 
to observe that they develop a mistaken view of the subject, which 
can only be imputed to your extreme want of accurate information.'

'My informiation,' retorted the Billickin, throwing in an extra 
syllable for the sake of emphasis at once polite and powerful - 'my 
informiation, Miss Twinkleton, were my own experience, which I 
believe is usually considered to be good guidance.  But whether so 
or not, I was put in youth to a very genteel boarding-school, the 
mistress being no less a lady than yourself, of about your own age 
or it may be some years younger, and a poorness of blood flowed 
from the table which has run through my life.'

'Very likely,' said Miss Twinkleton, still from her distant 
eminence; 'and very much to be deplored. - Rosa, my dear, how are 
you getting on with your work?'

'Miss Twinkleton,' resumed the Billickin, in a courtly manner, 
'before retiring on the 'int, as a lady should, I wish to ask of 
yourself, as a lady, whether I am to consider that my words is 
doubted?'

'I am not aware on what ground you cherish such a supposition,' 
began Miss Twinkleton, when the Billickin neatly stopped her.

'Do not, if you please, put suppositions betwixt my lips where none 
such have been imparted by myself.  Your flow of words is great, 
Miss Twinkleton, and no doubt is expected from you by your pupils, 
and no doubt is considered worth the money.  NO doubt, I am sure.  
But not paying for flows of words, and not asking to be favoured 
with them here, I wish to repeat my question.'

'If you refer to the poverty of your circulation,' began Miss 
Twinkleton, when again the Billickin neatly stopped her.

'I have used no such expressions.'

'If you refer, then, to the poorness of your blood - '

'Brought upon me,' stipulated the Billickin, expressly, 'at a 
boarding-school - '

'Then,' resumed Miss Twinkleton, 'all I can say is, that I am bound 
to believe, on your asseveration, that it is very poor indeed.  I 
cannot forbear adding, that if that unfortunate circumstance 
influences your conversation, it is much to be lamented, and it is 
eminently desirable that your blood were richer. - Rosa, my dear, 
how are you getting on with your work?'

'Hem!  Before retiring, Miss,' proclaimed the Billickin to Rosa, 
loftily cancelling Miss Twinkleton, 'I should wish it to be 
understood between yourself and me that my transactions in future 
is with you alone.  I know no elderly lady here, Miss, none older 
than yourself.'

'A highly desirable arrangement, Rosa my dear,' observed Miss 
Twinkleton.

'It is not, Miss,' said the Billickin, with a sarcastic smile, 
'that I possess the Mill I have heard of, in which old single 
ladies could be ground up young (what a gift it would be to some of 
us), but that I limit myself to you totally.'

'When I have any desire to communicate a request to the person of 
the house, Rosa my dear,' observed Miss Twinkleton with majestic 
cheerfulness, 'I will make it known to you, and you will kindly 
undertake, I am sure, that it is conveyed to the proper quarter.'

'Good-evening, Miss,' said the Billickin, at once affectionately 
and distantly.  'Being alone in my eyes, I wish you good-evening 
with best wishes, and do not find myself drove, I am truly 'appy to 
say, into expressing my contempt for an indiwidual, unfortunately 
for yourself, belonging to you.'

The Billickin gracefully withdrew with this parting speech, and 
from that time Rosa occupied the restless position of shuttlecock 
between these two battledores.  Nothing could be done without a 
smart match being played out.  Thus, on the daily-arising question 
of dinner, Miss Twinkleton would say, the three being present 
together:

'Perhaps, my love, you will consult with the person of the house, 
whether she can procure us a lamb's fry; or, failing that, a roast 
fowl.'

On which the Billickin would retort (Rosa not having spoken a 
word), 'If you was better accustomed to butcher's meat, Miss, you 
would not entertain the idea of a lamb's fry.  Firstly, because 
lambs has long been sheep, and secondly, because there is such 
things as killing-days, and there is not.  As to roast fowls, Miss, 
why you must be quite surfeited with roast fowls, letting alone 
your buying, when you market for yourself, the agedest of poultry 
with the scaliest of legs, quite as if you was accustomed to 
picking 'em out for cheapness.  Try a little inwention, Miss.  Use 
yourself to 'ousekeeping a bit.  Come now, think of somethink 
else.'

To this encouragement, offered with the indulgent toleration of a 
wise and liberal expert, Miss Twinkleton would rejoin, reddening:

'Or, my dear, you might propose to the person of the house a duck.'

'Well, Miss!' the Billickin would exclaim (still no word being 
spoken by Rosa), 'you do surprise me when you speak of ducks!  Not 
to mention that they're getting out of season and very dear, it 
really strikes to my heart to see you have a duck; for the breast, 
which is the only delicate cuts in a duck, always goes in a 
direction which I cannot imagine where, and your own plate comes 
down so miserably skin-and-bony!  Try again, Miss.  Think more of 
yourself, and less of others.  A dish of sweetbreads now, or a bit 
of mutton.  Something at which you can get your equal chance.'

Occasionally the game would wax very brisk indeed, and would be 
kept up with a smartness rendering such an encounter as this quite 
tame.  But the Billickin almost invariably made by far the higher 
score; and would come in with side hits of the most unexpected and 
extraordinary description, when she seemed without a chance.

All this did not improve the gritty state of things in London, or 
the air that London had acquired in Rosa's eyes of waiting for 
something that never came.  Tired of working, and conversing with 
Miss Twinkleton, she suggested working and reading:  to which Miss 
Twinkleton readily assented, as an admirable reader, of tried 
powers.  But Rosa soon made the discovery that Miss Twinkleton 
didn't read fairly.  She cut the love-scenes, interpolated passages 
in praise of female celibacy, and was guilty of other glaring pious 
frauds.  As an instance in point, take the glowing passage:  'Ever 
dearest and best adored, - said Edward, clasping the dear head to 
his breast, and drawing the silken hair through his caressing 
fingers, from which he suffered it to fall like golden rain, - ever 
dearest and best adored, let us fly from the unsympathetic world 
and the sterile coldness of the stony-hearted, to the rich warm 
Paradise of Trust and Love.'  Miss Twinkleton's fraudulent version 
tamely ran thus:  'Ever engaged to me with the consent of our 
parents on both sides, and the approbation of the silver-haired 
rector of the district, - said Edward, respectfully raising to his 
lips the taper fingers so skilful in embroidery, tambour, crochet, 
and other truly feminine arts, - let me call on thy papa ere to-
morrow's dawn has sunk into the west, and propose a suburban 
establishment, lowly it may be, but within our means, where he will 
be always welcome as an evening guest, and where every arrangement 
shall invest economy, and constant interchange of scholastic 
acquirements with the attributes of the ministering angel to 
domestic bliss.'

As the days crept on and nothing happened, the neighbours began to 
say that the pretty girl at Billickin's, who looked so wistfully 
and so much out of the gritty windows of the drawing-room, seemed 
to be losing her spirits.  The pretty girl might have lost them but 
for the accident of lighting on some books of voyages and sea-
adventure.  As a compensation against their romance, Miss 
Twinkleton, reading aloud, made the most of all the latitudes and 
longitudes, bearings, winds, currents, offsets, and other 
statistics (which she felt to be none the less improving because 
they expressed nothing whatever to her); while Rosa, listening 
intently, made the most of what was nearest to her heart.  So they 
both did better than before.

CHAPTER XXIII - THE DAWN AGAIN

ALTHOUGH Mr. Crisparkle and John Jasper met daily under the 
Cathedral roof, nothing at any time passed between them having 
reference to Edwin Drood, after the time, more than half a year 
gone by, when Jasper mutely showed the Minor Canon the conclusion 
and the resolution entered in his Diary.  It is not likely that 
they ever met, though so often, without the thoughts of each 
reverting to the subject.  It is not likely that they ever met, 
though so often, without a sensation on the part of each that the 
other was a perplexing secret to him. Jasper as the denouncer and 
pursuer of Neville Landless, and Mr. Crisparkle as his consistent 
advocate and protector, must at least have stood sufficiently in 
opposition to have speculated with keen interest on the steadiness 
and next direction of the other's designs.  But neither ever 
broached the theme.

False pretence not being in the Minor Canon's nature, he doubtless 
displayed openly that he would at any time have revived the 
subject, and even desired to discuss it.  The determined reticence 
of Jasper, however, was not to be so approached.  Impassive, moody, 
solitary, resolute, so concentrated on one idea, and on its 
attendant fixed purpose, that he would share it with no fellow-
creature, he lived apart from human life.  Constantly exercising an 
Art which brought him into mechanical harmony with others, and 
which could not have been pursued unless he and they had been in 
the nicest mechanical relations and unison, it is curious to 
consider that the spirit of the man was in moral accordance or 
interchange with nothing around him.  This indeed he had confided 
to his lost nephew, before the occasion for his present 
inflexibility arose.

That he must know of Rosa's abrupt departure, and that he must 
divine its cause, was not to be doubted.  Did he suppose that he 
had terrified her into silence? or did he suppose that she had 
imparted to any one - to Mr. Crisparkle himself, for instance - the 
particulars of his last interview with her?  Mr. Crisparkle could 
not determine this in his mind.  He could not but admit, however, 
as a just man, that it was not, of itself, a crime to fall in love 
with Rosa, any more than it was a crime to offer to set love above 
revenge.

The dreadful suspicion of Jasper, which Rosa was so shocked to have 
received into her imagination, appeared to have no harbour in Mr. 
Crisparkle's.  If it ever haunted Helena's thoughts or Neville's, 
neither gave it one spoken word of utterance.  Mr. Grewgious took 
no pains to conceal his implacable dislike of Jasper, yet he never 
referred it, however distantly, to such a source.  But he was a 
reticent as well as an eccentric man; and he made no mention of a 
certain evening when he warmed his hands at the gatehouse fire, and 
looked steadily down upon a certain heap of torn and miry clothes 
upon the floor.

Drowsy Cloisterham, whenever it awoke to a passing reconsideration 
of a story above six months old and dismissed by the bench of 
magistrates, was pretty equally divided in opinion whether John 
Jasper's beloved nephew had been killed by his treacherously 
passionate rival, or in an open struggle; or had, for his own 
purposes, spirited himself away.  It then lifted up its head, to 
notice that the bereaved Jasper was still ever devoted to discovery 
and revenge; and then dozed off again.  This was the condition of 
matters, all round, at the period to which the present history has 
now attained.

The Cathedral doors have closed for the night; and the Choir-
master, on a short leave of absence for two or three services, sets 
his face towards London.  He travels thither by the means by which 
Rosa travelled, and arrives, as Rosa arrived, on a hot, dusty 
evening.

His travelling baggage is easily carried in his hand, and he 
repairs with it on foot, to a hybrid hotel in a little square 
behind Aldersgate Street, near the General Post Office.  It is 
hotel, boarding-house, or lodging-house, at its visitor's option.  
It announces itself, in the new Railway Advertisers, as a novel 
enterprise, timidly beginning to spring up.  It bashfully, almost 
apologetically, gives the traveller to understand that it does not 
expect him, on the good old constitutional hotel plan, to order a 
pint of sweet blacking for his drinking, and throw it away; but 
insinuates that he may have his boots blacked instead of his 
stomach, and maybe also have bed, breakfast, attendance, and a 
porter up all night, for a certain fixed charge.  From these and 
similar premises, many true Britons in the lowest spirits deduce 
that the times are levelling times, except in the article of high 
roads, of which there will shortly be not one in England.

He eats without appetite, and soon goes forth again.  Eastward and 
still eastward through the stale streets he takes his way, until he 
reaches his destination:  a miserable court, specially miserable 
among many such.

He ascends a broken staircase, opens a door, looks into a dark 
stifling room, and says:  'Are you alone here?'

'Alone, deary; worse luck for me, and better for you,' replies a 
croaking voice.  'Come in, come in, whoever you be:  I can't see 
you till I light a match, yet I seem to know the sound of your 
speaking.  I'm acquainted with you, ain't I?'

'Light your match, and try.'

'So I will, deary, so I will; but my hand that shakes, as I can't 
lay it on a match all in a moment.  And I cough so, that, put my 
matches where I may, I never find 'em there.  They jump and start, 
as I cough and cough, like live things.  Are you off a voyage, 
deary?'

'No.'

'Not seafaring?'

'No.'

'Well, there's land customers, and there's water customers.  I'm a 
mother to both.  Different from Jack Chinaman t'other side the 
court.  He ain't a father to neither.  It ain't in him.  And he 
ain't got the true secret of mixing, though he charges as much as 
me that has, and more if he can get it.  Here's a match, and now 
where's the candle?  If my cough takes me, I shall cough out twenty 
matches afore I gets a light.'

But she finds the candle, and lights it, before the cough comes on.  
It seizes her in the moment of success, and she sits down rocking 
herself to and fro, and gasping at intervals:  'O, my lungs is 
awful bad! my lungs is wore away to cabbage-nets!' until the fit is 
over.  During its continuance she has had no power of sight, or any 
other power not absorbed in the struggle; but as it leaves her, she 
begins to strain her eyes, and as soon as she is able to 
articulate, she cries, staring:

'Why, it's you!'

'Are you so surprised to see me?'

'I thought I never should have seen you again, deary.  I thought 
you was dead, and gone to Heaven.'

'Why?'

'I didn't suppose you could have kept away, alive, so long, from 
the poor old soul with the real receipt for mixing it.  And you are 
in mourning too!  Why didn't you come and have a pipe or two of 
comfort?  Did they leave you money, perhaps, and so you didn't want 
comfort?'

' No.'

'Who was they as died, deary?'

'A relative.'

'Died of what, lovey?'

'Probably, Death.'

'We are short to-night!' cries the woman, with a propitiatory 
laugh.  'Short and snappish we are!  But we're out of sorts for 
want of a smoke.  We've got the all-overs, haven't us, deary?  But 
this is the place to cure 'em in; this is the place where the all-
overs is smoked off.'

'You may make ready, then,' replies the visitor, 'as soon as you 
like.'

He divests himself of his shoes, loosens his cravat, and lies 
across the foot of the squalid bed, with his head resting on his 
left hand.

'Now you begin to look like yourself,' says the woman approvingly.  
'Now I begin to know my old customer indeed!  Been trying to mix 
for yourself this long time, poppet?'

'I have been taking it now and then in my own way.'

'Never take it your own way.  It ain't good for trade, and it ain't 
good for you.  Where's my ink-bottle, and where's my thimble, and 
where's my little spoon?  He's going to take it in a artful form 
now, my deary dear!'

Entering on her process, and beginning to bubble and blow at the 
faint spark enclosed in the hollow of her hands, she speaks from 
time to time, in a tone of snuffling satisfaction, without leaving 
off.  When he speaks, he does so without looking at her, and as if 
his thoughts were already roaming away by anticipation.

'I've got a pretty many smokes ready for you, first and last, 
haven't I, chuckey?'

'A good many.'

'When you first come, you was quite new to it; warn't ye?'

'Yes, I was easily disposed of, then.'

'But you got on in the world, and was able by-and-by to take your 
pipe with the best of 'em, warn't ye?'

'Ah; and the worst.'

'It's just ready for you.  What a sweet singer you was when you 
first come!  Used to drop your head, and sing yourself off like a 
bird!  It's ready for you now, deary.'

He takes it from her with great care, and puts the mouthpiece to 
his lips.  She seats herself beside him, ready to refill the pipe.

After inhaling a few whiffs in silence, he doubtingly accosts her 
with:

'Is it as potent as it used to be?'

'What do you speak of, deary?'

'What should I speak of, but what I have in my mouth?'

'It's just the same.  Always the identical same.'

'It doesn't taste so.  And it's slower.'

'You've got more used to it, you see.'

'That may be the cause, certainly.  Look here.'  He stops, becomes 
dreamy, and seems to forget that he has invited her attention.  She 
bends over him, and speaks in his ear.

'I'm attending to you.  Says you just now, Look here.  Says I now, 
I'm attending to ye.  We was talking just before of your being used 
to it.'

'I know all that.  I was only thinking.  Look here.  Suppose you 
had something in your mind; something you were going to do.'

'Yes, deary; something I was going to do?'

'But had not quite determined to do.'

'Yes, deary.'

'Might or might not do, you understand.'

'Yes.'  With the point of a needle she stirs the contents of the 
bowl.

'Should you do it in your fancy, when you were lying here doing 
this?'

She nods her head.  'Over and over again.'

'Just like me!  I did it over and over again.  I have done it 
hundreds of thousands of times in this room.'

'It's to be hoped it was pleasant to do, deary.'

'It WAS pleasant to do!'

He says this with a savage air, and a spring or start at her.  
Quite unmoved she retouches and replenishes the contents of the 
bowl with her little spatula.  Seeing her intent upon the 
occupation, he sinks into his former attitude.

'It was a journey, a difficult and dangerous journey.  That was the 
subject in my mind.  A hazardous and perilous journey, over abysses 
where a slip would be destruction.  Look down, look down!  You see 
what lies at the bottom there?'

He has darted forward to say it, and to point at the ground, as 
though at some imaginary object far beneath.  The woman looks at 
him, as his spasmodic face approaches close to hers, and not at his 
pointing.  She seems to know what the influence of her perfect 
quietude would be; if so, she has not miscalculated it, for he 
subsides again.

'Well; I have told you I did it here hundreds of thousands of 
times.  What do I say?  I did it millions and billions of times.  I 
did it so often, and through such vast expanses of time, that when 
it was really done, it seemed not worth the doing, it was done so 
soon.'

'That's the journey you have been away upon,' she quietly remarks.

He glares at her as he smokes; and then, his eyes becoming filmy, 
answers:  'That's the journey.'

Silence ensues.  His eyes are sometimes closed and sometimes open.  
The woman sits beside him, very attentive to the pipe, which is all 
the while at his lips.

'I'll warrant,' she observes, when he has been looking fixedly at 
her for some consecutive moments, with a singular appearance in his 
eyes of seeming to see her a long way off, instead of so near him:  
'I'll warrant you made the journey in a many ways, when you made it 
so often?'

'No, always in one way.'

'Always in the same way?'

'Ay.'

'In the way in which it was really made at last?'

'Ay.'

'And always took the same pleasure in harping on it?'

'Ay.'

For the time he appears unequal to any other reply than this lazy 
monosyllabic assent.  Probably to assure herself that it is not the 
assent of a mere automaton, she reverses the form of her next 
sentence.

'Did you never get tired of it, deary, and try to call up something 
else for a change?'

He struggles into a sitting posture, and retorts upon her:  'What 
do you mean?  What did I want?  What did I come for?'

She gently lays him back again, and before returning him the 
instrument he has dropped, revives the fire in it with her own 
breath; then says to him, coaxingly:

'Sure, sure, sure!  Yes, yes, yes!  Now I go along with you.  You 
was too quick for me.  I see now.  You come o' purpose to take the 
journey.  Why, I might have known it, through its standing by you 
so.'

He answers first with a laugh, and then with a passionate setting 
of his teeth:  'Yes, I came on purpose.  When I could not bear my 
life, I came to get the relief, and I got it.  It WAS one!  It WAS 
one!'  This repetition with extraordinary vehemence, and the snarl 
of a wolf.

She observes him very cautiously, as though mentally feeling her 
way to her next remark.  It is:  'There was a fellow-traveller, 
deary.'

'Ha, ha, ha!'  He breaks into a ringing laugh, or rather yell.

'To think,' he cries, 'how often fellow-traveller, and yet not know 
it!  To think how many times he went the journey, and never saw the 
road!'

The woman kneels upon the floor, with her arms crossed on the 
coverlet of the bed, close by him, and her chin upon them.  In this 
crouching attitude she watches him.  The pipe is falling from his 
mouth.  She puts it back, and laying her hand upon his chest, moves 
him slightly from side to side.  Upon that he speaks, as if she had 
spoken.

'Yes!  I always made the journey first, before the changes of 
colours and the great landscapes and glittering processions began.  
They couldn't begin till it was off my mind.  I had no room till 
then for anything else.'

Once more he lapses into silence.  Once more she lays her hand upon 
his chest, and moves him slightly to and fro, as a cat might 
stimulate a half-slain mouse.  Once more he speaks, as if she had 
spoken.

'What?  I told you so.  When it comes to be real at last, it is so 
short that it seems unreal for the first time.  Hark!'

'Yes, deary.  I'm listening.'

'Time and place are both at hand.'

He is on his feet, speaking in a whisper, and as if in the dark.

'Time, place, and fellow-traveller,' she suggests, adopting his 
tone, and holding him softly by the arm.

'How could the time be at hand unless the fellow-traveller was?  
Hush!  The journey's made.  It's over.'

'So soon?'

'That's what I said to you.  So soon.  Wait a little.  This is a 
vision.  I shall sleep it off.  It has been too short and easy.  I 
must have a better vision than this; this is the poorest of all.  
No struggle, no consciousness of peril, no entreaty - and yet I 
never saw THAT before.'  With a start.

'Saw what, deary?'

'Look at it!  Look what a poor, mean, miserable thing it is!  THAT 
must be real.  It's over.'

He has accompanied this incoherence with some wild unmeaning 
gestures; but they trail off into the progressive inaction of 
stupor, and he lies a log upon the bed.

The woman, however, is still inquisitive.  With a repetition of her 
cat-like action she slightly stirs his body again, and listens; 
stirs again, and listens; whispers to it, and listens.  Finding it 
past all rousing for the time, she slowly gets upon her feet, with 
an air of disappointment, and flicks the face with the back of her 
hand in turning from it.

But she goes no further away from it than the chair upon the 
hearth.  She sits in it, with an elbow on one of its arms, and her 
chin upon her hand, intent upon him.  'I heard ye say once,' she 
croaks under her breath, 'I heard ye say once, when I was lying 
where you're lying, and you were making your speculations upon me, 
"Unintelligible!"  I heard you say so, of two more than me.  But 
don't ye be too sure always; don't be ye too sure, beauty!'

Unwinking, cat-like, and intent, she presently adds:  'Not so 
potent as it once was?  Ah!  Perhaps not at first.  You may be more 
right there.  Practice makes perfect.  I may have learned the 
secret how to make ye talk, deary.'

He talks no more, whether or no.  Twitching in an ugly way from 
time to time, both as to his face and limbs, he lies heavy and 
silent.  The wretched candle burns down; the woman takes its 
expiring end between her fingers, lights another at it, crams the 
guttering frying morsel deep into the candlestick, and rams it home 
with the new candle, as if she were loading some ill-savoured and 
unseemly weapon of witchcraft; the new candle in its turn burns 
down; and still he lies insensible.  At length what remains of the 
last candle is blown out, and daylight looks into the room.

It has not looked very long, when he sits up, chilled and shaking, 
slowly recovers consciousness of where he is, and makes himself 
ready to depart.  The woman receives what he pays her with a 
grateful, 'Bless ye, bless ye, deary!' and seems, tired out, to 
begin making herself ready for sleep as he leaves the room.

But seeming may be false or true.  It is false in this case; for, 
the moment the stairs have ceased to creak under his tread, she 
glides after him, muttering emphatically:  'I'll not miss ye 
twice!'

There is no egress from the court but by its entrance.  With a 
weird peep from the doorway, she watches for his looking back.  He 
does not look back before disappearing, with a wavering step.  She 
follows him, peeps from the court, sees him still faltering on 
without looking back, and holds him in view.

He repairs to the back of Aldersgate Street, where a door 
immediately opens to his knocking.  She crouches in another 
doorway, watching that one, and easily comprehending that he puts 
up temporarily at that house.  Her patience is unexhausted by 
hours.  For sustenance she can, and does, buy bread within a 
hundred yards, and milk as it is carried past her.

He comes forth again at noon, having changed his dress, but 
carrying nothing in his hand, and having nothing carried for him.  
He is not going back into the country, therefore, just yet.  She 
follows him a little way, hesitates, instantaneously turns 
confidently, and goes straight into the house he has quitted.

'Is the gentleman from Cloisterham indoors?

'Just gone out.'

'Unlucky.  When does the gentleman return to Cloisterham?'

'At six this evening.'

'Bless ye and thank ye.  May the Lord prosper a business where a 
civil question, even from a poor soul, is so civilly answered!'

'I'll not miss ye twice!' repeats the poor soul in the street, and 
not so civilly.  'I lost ye last, where that omnibus you got into 
nigh your journey's end plied betwixt the station and the place.  I 
wasn't so much as certain that you even went right on to the place.  
Now I know ye did.  My gentleman from Cloisterham, I'll be there 
before ye, and bide your coming.  I've swore my oath that I'll not 
miss ye twice!'

Accordingly, that same evening the poor soul stands in Cloisterham 
High Street, looking at the many quaint gables of the Nuns' House, 
and getting through the time as she best can until nine o'clock; at 
which hour she has reason to suppose that the arriving omnibus 
passengers may have some interest for her.  The friendly darkness, 
at that hour, renders it easy for her to ascertain whether this be 
so or not; and it is so, for the passenger not to be missed twice 
arrives among the rest.

'Now let me see what becomes of you.  Go on!'

An observation addressed to the air, and yet it might be addressed 
to the passenger, so compliantly does he go on along the High 
Street until he comes to an arched gateway, at which he 
unexpectedly vanishes.  The poor soul quickens her pace; is swift, 
and close upon him entering under the gateway; but only sees a 
postern staircase on one side of it, and on the other side an 
ancient vaulted room, in which a large-headed, gray-haired 
gentleman is writing, under the odd circumstances of sitting open 
to the thoroughfare and eyeing all who pass, as if he were toll-
taker of the gateway:  though the way is free.

'Halloa!' he cries in a low voice, seeing her brought to a stand-
still:  'who are you looking for?'

'There was a gentleman passed in here this minute, sir.'

'Of course there was.  What do you want with him?'

'Where do he live, deary?'

'Live?  Up that staircase.'

'Bless ye!  Whisper.  What's his name, deary?'

'Surname Jasper, Christian name John.  Mr. John Jasper.'

'Has he a calling, good gentleman?'

'Calling?  Yes.  Sings in the choir.'

'In the spire?'

'Choir.'

'What's that?'

Mr. Datchery rises from his papers, and comes to his doorstep.  'Do 
you know what a cathedral is?' he asks, jocosely.

The woman nods.

'What is it?'

She looks puzzled, casting about in her mind to find a definition, 
when it occurs to her that it is easier to point out the 
substantial object itself, massive against the dark-blue sky and 
the early stars.

'That's the answer.  Go in there at seven to-morrow morning, and 
you may see Mr. John Jasper, and hear him too.'

'Thank ye!  Thank ye!'

The burst of triumph in which she thanks him does not escape the 
notice of the single buffer of an easy temper living idly on his 
means.  He glances at her; clasps his hands behind him, as the wont 
of such buffers is; and lounges along the echoing Precincts at her 
side.

'Or,' he suggests, with a backward hitch of his head, 'you can go 
up at once to Mr. Jasper's rooms there.'

The woman eyes him with a cunning smile, and shakes her head.

'O! you don't want to speak to him?'

She repeats her dumb reply, and forms with her lips a soundless 
'No.'

'You can admire him at a distance three times a day, whenever you 
like.  It's a long way to come for that, though.'

The woman looks up quickly.  If Mr. Datchery thinks she is to be so 
induced to declare where she comes from, he is of a much easier 
temper than she is.  But she acquits him of such an artful thought, 
as he lounges along, like the chartered bore of the city, with his 
uncovered gray hair blowing about, and his purposeless hands 
rattling the loose money in the pockets of his trousers.

The chink of the money has an attraction for her greedy ears.  
'Wouldn't you help me to pay for my traveller's lodging, dear 
gentleman, and to pay my way along?  I am a poor soul, I am indeed, 
and troubled with a grievous cough.'

'You know the travellers' lodging, I perceive, and are making 
directly for it,' is Mr. Datchery's bland comment, still rattling 
his loose money.  'Been here often, my good woman?'

'Once in all my life.'

'Ay, ay?'

They have arrived at the entrance to the Monks' Vineyard.  An 
appropriate remembrance, presenting an exemplary model for 
imitation, is revived in the woman's mind by the sight of the 
place.  She stops at the gate, and says energetically:

'By this token, though you mayn't believe it, That a young 
gentleman gave me three-and-sixpence as I was coughing my breath 
away on this very grass.  I asked him for three-and-sixpence, and 
he gave it me.'

'Wasn't it a little cool to name your sum?' hints Mr. Datchery, 
still rattling.  'Isn't it customary to leave the amount open?  
Mightn't it have had the appearance, to the young gentleman - only 
the appearance - that he was rather dictated to?'

'Look'ee here, deary,' she replies, in a confidential and 
persuasive tone, 'I wanted the money to lay it out on a medicine as 
does me good, and as I deal in.  I told the young gentleman so, and 
he gave it me, and I laid it out honest to the last brass farden.  
I want to lay out the same sum in the same way now; and if you'll 
give it me, I'll lay it out honest to the last brass farden again, 
upon my soul!'

'What's the medicine?'

'I'll be honest with you beforehand, as well as after.  It's 
opium.'

Mr. Datchery, with a sudden change of countenance, gives her a 
sudden look.

'It's opium, deary.  Neither more nor less.  And it's like a human 
creetur so far, that you always hear what can be said against it, 
but seldom what can be said in its praise.'

Mr. Datchery begins very slowly to count out the sum demanded of 
him.  Greedily watching his hands, she continues to hold forth on 
the great example set him.

'It was last Christmas Eve, just arter dark, the once that I was 
here afore, when the young gentleman gave me the three-and-six.'  
Mr. Datchery stops in his counting, finds he has counted wrong, 
shakes his money together, and begins again.

'And the young gentleman's name,' she adds, 'was Edwin.'

Mr. Datchery drops some money, stoops to pick it up, and reddens 
with the exertion as he asks:

'How do you know the young gentleman's name?'

'I asked him for it, and he told it me.  I only asked him the two 
questions, what was his Chris'en name, and whether he'd a 
sweetheart?  And he answered, Edwin, and he hadn't.'

Mr. Datchery pauses with the selected coins in his hand, rather as 
if he were falling into a brown study of their value, and couldn't 
bear to part with them.  The woman looks at him distrustfully, and 
with her anger brewing for the event of his thinking better of the 
gift; but he bestows it on her as if he were abstracting his mind 
from the sacrifice, and with many servile thanks she goes her way.

John Jasper's lamp is kindled, and his lighthouse is shining when 
Mr. Datchery returns alone towards it.  As mariners on a dangerous 
voyage, approaching an iron-bound coast, may look along the beams 
of the warning light to the haven lying beyond it that may never be 
reached, so Mr. Datchery's wistful gaze is directed to this beacon, 
and beyond.

His object in now revisiting his lodging is merely to put on the 
hat which seems so superfluous an article in his wardrobe.  It is 
half-past ten by the Cathedral clock when he walks out into the 
Precincts again; he lingers and looks about him, as though, the 
enchanted hour when Mr. Durdles may be stoned home having struck, 
he had some expectation of seeing the Imp who is appointed to the 
mission of stoning him.

In effect, that Power of Evil is abroad.  Having nothing living to 
stone at the moment, he is discovered by Mr. Datchery in the unholy 
office of stoning the dead, through the railings of the churchyard.  
The Imp finds this a relishing and piquing pursuit; firstly, 
because their resting-place is announced to be sacred; and 
secondly, because the tall headstones are sufficiently like 
themselves, on their beat in the dark, to justify the delicious 
fancy that they are hurt when hit.

Mr. Datchery hails with him:  'Halloa, Winks!'

He acknowledges the hail with:  'Halloa, Dick!'  Their acquaintance 
seemingly having been established on a familiar footing.

'But, I say,' he remonstrates, 'don't yer go a-making my name 
public.  I never means to plead to no name, mind yer.  When they 
says to me in the Lock-up, a-going to put me down in the book, 
"What's your name?" I says to them, "Find out."  Likewise when they 
says, "What's your religion?" I says, "Find out."'

Which, it may be observed in passing, it would be immensely 
difficult for the State, however statistical, to do.

'Asides which,' adds the boy, 'there ain't no family of Winkses.'

'I think there must be.'

'Yer lie, there ain't.  The travellers give me the name on account 
of my getting no settled sleep and being knocked up all night; 
whereby I gets one eye roused open afore I've shut the other.  
That's what Winks means.  Deputy's the nighest name to indict me 
by:  but yer wouldn't catch me pleading to that, neither.'

'Deputy be it always, then.  We two are good friends; eh, Deputy?'

'Jolly good.'

'I forgave you the debt you owed me when we first became 
acquainted, and many of my sixpences have come your way since; eh, 
Deputy?'

'Ah!  And what's more, yer ain't no friend o' Jarsper's.  What did 
he go a-histing me off my legs for?'

'What indeed!  But never mind him now.  A shilling of mine is going 
your way to-night, Deputy.  You have just taken in a lodger I have 
been speaking to; an infirm woman with a cough.'

'Puffer,' assents Deputy, with a shrewd leer of recognition, and 
smoking an imaginary pipe, with his head very much on one side and 
his eyes very much out of their places:  'Hopeum Puffer.'

'What is her name?'

''Er Royal Highness the Princess Puffer.'

'She has some other name than that; where does she live?'

'Up in London.  Among the Jacks.'

'The sailors?'

'I said so; Jacks; and Chayner men:  and hother Knifers.'

'I should like to know, through you, exactly where she lives.'

'All right.  Give us 'old.'

A shilling passes; and, in that spirit of confidence which should 
pervade all business transactions between principals of honour, 
this piece of business is considered done.

'But here's a lark!' cries Deputy.  'Where did yer think 'Er Royal 
Highness is a-goin' to to-morrow morning?  Blest if she ain't a-
goin' to the KIN-FREE-DER-EL!'  He greatly prolongs the word in his 
ecstasy, and smites his leg, and doubles himself up in a fit of 
shrill laughter.

'How do you know that, Deputy?'

'Cos she told me so just now.  She said she must be hup and hout o' 
purpose.  She ses, "Deputy, I must 'ave a early wash, and make 
myself as swell as I can, for I'm a-goin' to take a turn at the 
KIN-FREE-DER-EL!"'  He separates the syllables with his former 
zest, and, not finding his sense of the ludicrous sufficiently 
relieved by stamping about on the pavement, breaks into a slow and 
stately dance, perhaps supposed to be performed by the Dean.

Mr. Datchery receives the communication with a well-satisfied 
though pondering face, and breaks up the conference.  Returning to 
his quaint lodging, and sitting long over the supper of bread-and-
cheese and salad and ale which Mrs. Tope has left prepared for him, 
he still sits when his supper is finished.  At length he rises, 
throws open the door of a corner cupboard, and refers to a few 
uncouth chalked strokes on its inner side.

'I like,' says Mr. Datchery, 'the old tavern way of keeping scores.  
Illegible except to the scorer.  The scorer not committed, the 
scored debited with what is against him.  Hum; ha!  A very small 
score this; a very poor score!'

He sighs over the contemplation of its poverty, takes a bit of 
chalk from one of the cupboard shelves, and pauses with it in his 
hand, uncertain what addition to make to the account.

'I think a moderate stroke,' he concludes, 'is all I am justified 
in scoring up;' so, suits the action to the word, closes the 
cupboard, and goes to bed.

A brilliant morning shines on the old city.  Its antiquities and 
ruins are surpassingly beautiful, with a lusty ivy gleaming in the 
sun, and the rich trees waving in the balmy air.  Changes of 
glorious light from moving boughs, songs of birds, scents from 
gardens, woods, and fields - or, rather, from the one great garden 
of the whole cultivated island in its yielding time - penetrate 
into the Cathedral, subdue its earthy odour, and preach the 
Resurrection and the Life.  The cold stone tombs of centuries ago 
grow warm; and flecks of brightness dart into the sternest marble 
corners of the building, fluttering there like wings.

Comes Mr. Tope with his large keys, and yawningly unlocks and sets 
open.  Come Mrs. Tope and attendant sweeping sprites.  Come, in due 
time, organist and bellows-boy, peeping down from the red curtains 
in the loft, fearlessly flapping dust from books up at that remote 
elevation, and whisking it from stops and pedals.  Come sundry 
rooks, from various quarters of the sky, back to the great tower; 
who may be presumed to enjoy vibration, and to know that bell and 
organ are going to give it them.  Come a very small and straggling 
congregation indeed:  chiefly from Minor Canon Corner and the 
Precincts.  Come Mr. Crisparkle, fresh and bright; and his 
ministering brethren, not quite so fresh and bright.  Come the 
Choir in a hurry (always in a hurry, and struggling into their 
nightgowns at the last moment, like children shirking bed), and 
comes John Jasper leading their line.  Last of all comes Mr. 
Datchery into a stall, one of a choice empty collection very much 
at his service, and glancing about him for Her Royal Highness the 
Princess Puffer.

The service is pretty well advanced before Mr. Datchery can discern 
Her Royal Highness.  But by that time he has made her out, in the 
shade.  She is behind a pillar, carefully withdrawn from the Choir-
master's view, but regards him with the closest attention.  All 
unconscious of her presence, he chants and sings.  She grins when 
he is most musically fervid, and - yes, Mr. Datchery sees her do 
it! - shakes her fist at him behind the pillar's friendly shelter.

Mr. Datchery looks again, to convince himself.  Yes, again!  As 
ugly and withered as one of the fantastic carvings on the under 
brackets of the stall seats, as malignant as the Evil One, as hard 
as the big brass eagle holding the sacred books upon his wings 
(and, according to the sculptor's representation of his ferocious 
attributes, not at all converted by them), she hugs herself in her 
lean arms, and then shakes both fists at the leader of the Choir.

And at that moment, outside the grated door of the Choir, having 
eluded the vigilance of Mr. Tope by shifty resources in which he is 
an adept, Deputy peeps, sharp-eyed, through the bars, and stares 
astounded from the threatener to the threatened.

The service comes to an end, and the servitors disperse to 
breakfast.  Mr. Datchery accosts his last new acquaintance outside, 
when the Choir (as much in a hurry to get their bedgowns off, as 
they were but now to get them on) have scuffled away.

'Well, mistress.  Good morning.  You have seen him?'

'I'VE seen him, deary; I'VE seen him!'

'And you know him?'

'Know him!  Better far than all the Reverend Parsons put together 
know him.'

Mrs. Tope's care has spread a very neat, clean breakfast ready for 
her lodger.  Before sitting down to it, he opens his corner-
cupboard door; takes his bit of chalk from its shelf; adds one 
thick line to the score, extending from the top of the cupboard 
door to the bottom; and then falls to with an appetite.


